
Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 42239-h.htm or 42239-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/42239/42239-h/42239-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/42239/42239-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries. See
      http://archive.org/details/pastonlettersad05gairuoft


      Project Gutenberg has the other volumes of this work.
         Volume I: see http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/43348
         Volume II: see http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/40989
         Volume III: see http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/41024
         Volume IV: see http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/41081
         Volume VI, Part 1 (Letters, Chronological Table): see http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/42240
         Volume VI, Part 2 (Index): see http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/42494


Transcriber's note:

      This text uses UTF-8 (Unicode) file encoding. If the
      apostrophes and quotation marks in this paragraph appear
      as garbage, make sure your text reader’s “character set”
      or “file encoding” is set to Unicode (UTF-8). You may also
      need to change the default font. As a last resort, use the
      Latin-1 (iso-8859-1) version of the file instead.

      The Gairdner edition of the Paston Letters was printed in six
      volumes. Each volume is a separate e-text; Volume VI is further
      divided into two e-texts, Letters and Index. Volume I, the
      General Introduction, will be released after all other volumes,
      matching the original publication order.

      Except for footnotes and sidenotes, all brackets are in the
      original, as are parenthetical question marks and (_sic_)
      notations. Series of dots representing damaged text are shown
      as in the printed original.

      The year was shown in a sidenote at the top of each page; this
      has been merged with the sidenote at the beginning of each
      Letter or Abstract.

      A carat character is used to denote superscription. The
      character(s) following the carat is superscripted (example:
      vj^ti). Braces { } are used only when the superscripted
      text is immediately followed by non-superscripted letters
      or period (full stop).  Subscripts rare) are shown with
      single lines _. Errata and other transcriber’s notes are
      shown in [[double brackets]].

      Footnotes have their original numbering, with added page
      number to make them usable with the full Index. They are
      grouped at the end of each Letter or Abstract.

      Typographical errors are listed at the end of each Letter,
      after the footnotes. In the primary text, errors were only
      corrected if they are clearly editorial, such as missing
      italics, or mechanical, such as u-for-n misprints. Italic
      “d” misprinted as “a” was a recurring problem, especially
      in Volume IV. The word “invisible” means that there is
      an appropriately sized blank space, but the letter or
      punctuation mark itself is missing. The form “corrected
      by author” refers to the Errata printed at the end of the
      Letters, in Volume VI.

      Specifics: The spelling “Jhon” is not an error. Gresham
      and Tresham are different people. Conversely, the
      inconsistent spelling “Lipyate” or “Lipgate” in footnotes
      is unchanged. In this volume, the spelling “apostyle” for
      “apostille” is used consistently.

      Note that the printed book used z to represent original yogh
      ȝ. This has not been changed for the e-text.





This edition, published by arrangement with Messrs. ARCHIBALD CONSTABLE
AND COMPANY, LIMITED, is strictly limited to 650 copies for Great
Britain and America, of which only 600 sets are for sale, and are
numbered 1 to 600.

No. 47

  [[The number 47 is handwritten.]]


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *


              THE PASTON LETTERS

                A.D. 1422-1509


           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *

THE PASTON LETTERS
A.D. 1422-1509

New Complete Library Edition

Edited with Notes and an Introduction

by

JAMES GAIRDNER
of the Public Record Office

_VOLUME V_







London
Chatto & Windus

[Decoration]

Exeter
James G. Commin
1904

Edinburgh: T. and A. CONSTABLE, Printers to His Majesty




THE PASTON LETTERS

_Edward IV_




695

WILLIAM EBESHAM TO SIR JOHN PASTON[1-1]

_To my moost worshupfull maister, Sir John Paston, Knyght._

[Sidenote: 1469(?)]

My moost woorshupfull and moost speciall maister, with all my servyce
moost lowly I recomande unto your gode maistirship, besechyng you most
tendirly to see me sumwhat rewardid for my labour in the Grete
Booke[1-2] which I wright unto your seide gode maistirship. I have often
tymes writyn to Pampyng accordyng to your desire, to enforme you hou I
have labourd in wrytyngs for you; and I see wele he speke not to your
maistership of hit. And God knowith I ly in seint warye [_sanctuary_] at
grete costs, and amongs right unresonable askers. I movid this mater to
Sir Thomas[1-3] late, and he tolde me he wolde move your maistirship
therein, which Sir Thomas desirid me to remembir wele what I have had in
money at soondry tymes of hym.[2-1]

      .      .      .      .      .      .      .

And in especiall I beseche you to sende me for almes oon of your olde
gownes, which will countirvale much of the premysses I wote wele; and I
shall be yours while I lyve, and at your comandement; I have grete myst
of it, God knows, whom I beseche preserve you from all adversite. I am
sumwhat acqueyntid with it. Your verry man,

  W. EBSHAM.

Folowyng apperith, parcelly, dyvers and soondry maner of writyngs, which
I William Ebesham have wreetyn for my gode and woorshupfull maistir, Sir
John Paston, and what money I have resceyvid, and what is unpaide.

  First, I did write to his maistership a litill booke of Pheesyk,
  for which I had paide by Sir Thomas Leevys[2-2] in Westminster
    xx_d._

  Item, I had for the wrytyng of half the prevy seale of Pampyng
    viij_d._

  Item, for the wrytynge of the seid hole prevy seale of Sir Thomas
    ij_s._

  Item, I wrote viij. of the Witnessis in parchement, but aftir
  xiiij^d. a peece, for which I was paide of Sir Thomas
    x_s._

  Item, while my seide maister was over the see in Midsomerterme

  Calle sett me a warke to wryte two tymes the prevy seale in papir,
  and then after cleerely in parchement
    iiij_s._ viij_d._

  And also wrote the same tyme oon mo of the lengist witnessis,
  and other dyvers and necessary wrytyngs, for which he promisid me
  x^s. whereof I had of Calle but iiij^s. viij^d. car. v^s. iiij^d.
    v_s._ iiij_d._

  I resceyvid of Sir Thomas at Westminster, penultimo die Oct., anno
  viij.
    iij_s._ iiij_d._

  Item, I did write to quairs of papir of witnessis, every quair
  conteynyng xiiij. leves after ij^d. a leff
    iiij_s._ viij_d._

  Item, as to the Grete Booke--First, for wrytyng of the Coronacion,
  and other tretys of Knyghthode, in that quaire which conteyneth
  a xiij. levis and more, ij^d. a lef
    ij_s._ ii_d._

  Item, for the tretys of Werre in iiij. books, which conteyneth
  lx. levis aftir ij^d. a leaff
    x_s._

  Item, for _Othea_[3-1] pistill, which conteyneth xliij. leves
    vii_s._ ij_d._

  Item, for the Chalengs, and the Acts of Armes which is xxviij^ti
  lefs
    iiij_s._ viij_d._

  Item, for _De Regimine Principum_, which conteyneth xlv^ti leves,
  aftir a peny a leef, which is right wele worth
    iij_s._ ix_d._

  Item, for Rubrissheyng of all the booke
    iii_s._ iiij_d._

  Summa rest’
      xxij_s._ iiij_d._

  Summa non solut’
      xlj_s._ j_d._,
      unde pro magno[4-1] libro scripto xxvij^s cum diu’ chal.[4-2]

  Summa Totalis
    iij_li._ iij_s._ v_d._

  WILLIAM EBESHAM.


  In further illustration of the payments made in that age for
  writing, etc., Sir John Fenn gives the following extracts from an
  original quarto MS. then in his possession, containing--

The various expences of Sir John Howard, Knight, of Stoke by Neyland, in
Suffolk (afterwards Duke of Norfolk), page 136.

Item, the vij^th yere of Kynge Edward the iiij^th, and the xxviij. day
of July (1467). My master rekened with Thomas Lympnour of Bury, and my
master peid hym--

  For viij. hole vynets . . . prise the vynett, xii_d._,
    viij_s._

  Item, for xxj. demi vynets . . . prise the demi vynett, iiij_d._
    vij_s._

  Item, for Psalmes lettres xv^c. and di’ . . . the prise of
  C. iiij_d._
    v_s._ ij_d._

  Item, for p’ms letters lxiij^c. . . . prise of a C., j_d._
    v iij_d._

  Item, for wrytynge of a quare and demi . . . prise the quayr, xx_d._
    ij_s._ vj_d._

  Item, for wrytenge of a calender,
    xij_d._

  Item, for iij. quayres of velym, prise the quayr, xx_d._
    v_s._

  Item, for notynge of v. quayres and ij. leves, prise of the quayr,
  viij[_d._]
    iij_s._ vij_d._

  Item, for capital drawynge iij^c. and di’, the prise,
    iij_d._

  Item, for floryshynge of capytalls, v^c.
    v_d._

  Item, for byndynge of the boke,
    xij_s._

  c_s._ ij_d._

The wyche parcellis my master paid hym this day, and he is content.

This is an account of a limner or illuminator of manuscripts, who
resided at Bury.

    [Footnote 1-1: [From Fenn, ii. 10.] By the date of one item in the
    account subjoined to this letter it must have been written after
    the year 1468, probably in the year following.]

    [Footnote 1-2: This ‘great book’ has been identified, on evidence
    which at first sight seems conclusive, with MS. 285 in the
    Lansdowne library in the British Museum. But probably this latter
    is only another transcript by Ebesham of a very similar volume.
    _See_ Account of this MS. in ‘Sailing Directions for the
    Circumnavigation of England,’ published by the Hakluyt Society in
    1889.]

    [Footnote 1-3: Sir Thomas Lewis, a priest.]

    [Footnote 2-1: Here (according to Fenn) follows the account as
    stated more at large in the subjoined Bill.]

    [Footnote 2-2: Fenn’s modern transcript reads Lewis. Is ‘Leevys’
    in the other a misprint for ‘Lewys’?]

    [Footnote 3-1: _Othea_ means a treatise on Wisdom.--F.
    The name is derived from the Greek Ὠ θεὰ, but was used in the
    Middle Ages as a proper name. See a poem beginning

      ‘Othea of prudence named godesse,’

    mentioned in the Third Report of the Historical MSS. Commission,
    p. 188.]

    [Footnote 4-1: _magno_, ‘m^o’ in Fenn.]

    [Footnote 4-2: So in Fenn. Qu. _cum diurnali challengiorum_? Fenn
    omits the whole of this clause, unde . . . . chal’, but notices
    its occurrence in a footnote.]

  [[_In this section, many italic “d”s were misprinted as “a”.
  They have not been individually noted._

  ... the Chalengs, and the Acts of Armes which is xxviij^ti lefs
  _text has “less”; corrected from Fenn (“lefs” with “f” misread as
  “leſs” with long “s”)_

  ... prise the vynett, xii_d._,
  _anomalous final comma in original_

  Item, for p’ms letters lxiij^c. . . . prise of a C., j_d._
  v iij_d._
  _text unchanged: _s._ after “v” missing_]]


696

THE EARL OF OXFORD TO SIR JOHN PASTON[5-1]

_To the worshipfull, and with alle myn hert right entierly bilovyd Sir
John Paston, Knyght, this lettre be delivered._

TH’ERLE OF OXINFORD.

[Sidenote: 1469(?) / JAN. 7]

Right hertly welbilovyd, I grete you wele. And where I am for trowth
enformyd that the Duchesse of Suffolk wolle hold a court on Monday next
commyng at Coton, to th’entent that she wolle fynde the maner of
Thempnals holde of hir by knyghts service and they that ben
possessioners of the same shulde payle certeine of the Parke of
Weverston; and by cause this is nat performyd nor don, thoo that ben
possessioners shall at the said court be amersid. And it is agreed that
Sir William Yelverton, Sir Thomas Hoo, shalle be at the said court and
wolle pay the amercyment, and to delyver the said Duchesse possession of
the said service and palyng, and so by this meane to be come tenauntes
to the said Duchesse. And what wolle be falle more herof I kan nat sey.
Wherfor me thinkith it were welle don ye were at the said court with
your councell, and to do therin as they wolle avise you. Also as ye come
to the said court take your wey by the said Duchesse to th’entent that
ye come to se hir welfare, &c. Do herin as your councell wolle avyse
you. I wolde ye dud welle. And to my power I wolle help you. And our
Lorde kepe yow. Writyn at Tatyngston the vij. day of Januer.

  _Endorsed_: Th’Erle off Oxenfford.

    [Footnote 5-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] It will be seen by No.
    690, that in October 1468 the Duchess of Suffolk had a design of
    suddenly entering the manor of Cotton and dispossessing Sir John
    Paston. This letter, in which it is said she proposes to hold a
    court there, was probably written in the beginning of the
    following year.]


697

ABSTRACT[6-1]

[Sidenote: 1469 / JAN. 9]

W. COTING to JOHN COOK, draper of Norwich, ‘and that he deliver or send
this bill to Richard Kalle in all goodly haste, for the matter is of
substance.’

This day in the grey morning three men of my Lord of Norfolk with long
spears carried off three good horses from John Poleyn, ‘one of your
farmers at Tichewell,’ telling him to treat with my Lord of Norfolk.
Wishes to know what to do, ‘for such an open wrong unremedied knew I
never.’ Saturday after Epiphany.

‘Anno viij^o’ is written below.

[The signature of this letter is written in an abbreviated form, ‘W.
Cot.’ According to Blomefield, W. Cotyng was rector of Titchwell from
1450 to 1457, and he had been previously rector of Swainsthorp, to which
he was presented by Judge Paston in 1444. This letter is twelve years
later than the date at which his incumbency of Titchwell is said to have
terminated; but doubtless he is the writer. He is referred to as living
even in the year 1485, in a letter written by Dame Elizabeth Browne, who
says that he and James Gresham were clerks to her father Judge Paston.]

    [Footnote 6-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]


698

EDWARD IV. TO SIR JOHN PASTON[6-2]

_To our trusty and welbeloved Sir John Paston, Knight._

BY THE KINGE.

[Sidenote: 1469 / JAN. 18]

Trusty and welbeloved, we grete yow well. And how be it that we late
addressed unto yow our letters, and commanded yow by the same, for the
consideracions in them conteined, to have ceased of makinge any
assemblye of our people for the matter of variance dependinge betwixt
yow on that one partie, and our right trustie and right entirely beloved
cosin the Duke of Norffolk on that other, and to have appeared before
the Lords of our Councell at our Palleys of Westminster at a certeine
day in our said letters specified; yett nevertheless we understonde not
as yet if ye have conformed yow to the performinge of our said
commandement or not. We therefore eftsones write unto yow, willing and
straitly charging yow to cease of the said ryotts and assemblies; and
that incontinent upon the sight of these our letters that ye dispose yow
personally to appear afore the said Lords of our Councell at our said
Pallis, there to answere to such thinges as in that behalfe by them
shall be laid and objected against yow, not failinge hereof, all excuses
laid aparte, as ye will avoide our displeasure. Yeven under our signet
at our citye of Salesbury, the xviij. day of January.

    [Footnote 6-2: This letter is reprinted from the Paston Genealogy
    in the _Norfolk Archæology_, to which we have already several
    times referred (_see_ Nos. 484, 641, 643, etc.). Edward IV. was at
    Salisbury in January 1469, one of his privy seals being dated
    there on the 16th of the month.]


699

SIR JOHN PASTON TO ROGER TOWNSEND[7-1]

_To the ryght worshypfull and hys best betrustyd Frende, Roger
Townesende._

[Sidenote: 1467-9 / FEB. 12]

Right worshipfull sir, I comaunde me to yow, praying yow hertly to
remembre that by the award made bytwen yow and me by Roger Townesend for
a tenement in Stratton in Norfolk callid Rees, I shuld delyver yow all
the evydens apperteynyng to the said plase, and not from thens forth to
chalenge nor interupte my lady your wife ner yow of the said tenement;
And that for thes said causes ye shuld and therto were agreyd to geve me
an horse and x_li._ to an harneys. And moreovir before Cristemasse in
the kynges chambre ye ther ageyn promysed me that ye wold such tyme as I
send to yow home to yowre plase by any servant of myne er any man from
me, that ye wold delyver it hym and send it to me by hym. My brothir
John hath send me word that he remembird yow therof on my behalfe and
that you answerid hym that ye wold gyfe hym or me a fayre harneys at
your comyng to London. I deme in yow that ye thynke par case to bye a
fayre harneys here for x. markz; but, cosyn, as God help me, I bowte an
harneys syn that tyme for my self, which cost me xx_li._ But I con not
desire of yow so moch. Wherfore, cosyn, with all myn hert I pray yow
accordyng to yowre promyse that it like yow to send me by my servaunt,
berer herof, the said somme of x_li._, as my trust is in yow, and as I
wolde in like case have don to yow, and as in the premysses I delt
feithfully with yow and evir so shall dele, with the grase of God, Who
have yow in Hys kepyng. Wretyn at London the xii. day of
Feveryer.--Youris,

  JOHN PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 7-1: [Add. MS. 34,889, f. 186.] This letter was probably
    written after the death of John Paston, the writer’s father, but
    the precise year is uncertain.]

  [[John Paston, k.
  _printed with anomalous small “k.”_]]


700

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[8-1]

_To my mastyr, Sir John Paston, knyght, in Flet stret._

[Sidenote: 1468-9(?)]

Syr, &c. It is so that, with owght ye have hasty reparacyon doon at
Caster, ye be lyek to have doubyll cost in hast, for the reyn hathe so
moystyd the wallys in many plasys that they may not tylle the howsys
tyll the wallys be reparyd; or ellys ye shall have doubyll cost for to
untylle your howsys ayen at syche tyme as ye shall amend the wallys. And
if it be not do thys yer, many of the wallys wyll lye in the moot or
longe to; ye knowe the febyllnesse of the utter coort of old. John
Pampyng hathe had hame to Caster as good as x^ml. tylle fyr the plase at
Yermeuthe, and it wer pete that the tyll wer lost; and the lenger that
it lythe unleyd the wers it wyll be. I have thys day bespok as myche
lyme as wyll serve for the tyll. Wherfor I prey yow remembyr the cost of
the werkmanschep and purvey the money by oo mean or othyr, what shefte
so evyr ye make. And, for your owne profyte, remembyr to goo thorow with
Hwghe of Fen; for by my trowthe ye wyll ellys repent yow er owght longe.
For bothe ye shall loose hys good wyll and lett peraventure that
avantage that he myght do yow in your lond recoveryng; wher as he may do
yow harme and [_if_] he wyll and then, to late wyse. Item, that ye
remembyr your relesys and gounys of my Lord of Norffolk er ye com hom.
Item, I send yow by the berer herof a lettyr dyrect to yow that a man of
my Lord of Oxenfortheys delyverd me; whych lettyr comyth fro the Kyng.
Item, that ye remembyr in eny wyse to serche for the fyne in syche
plasys as my modyr sent you woord of in a lettyr; for myn oncyll and my
grauntdam report that they have serchyd in all plasys thar as it shold
be, but they can not fynd no thyng of it. Also that ye look whedyr the
fyne was reryd to eny feeffeys mor then to my grauntfadyr and my
grauntdam and ther issu; for and ther wer eny feoffeys namyd in the fyn,
it is the bettyr for yow. My Lady and my grauntdam be com to London for
the same mater; wherfor it wer well do that the jwgys wer enformyd of
your mater befor they spok with theym. I prey yow hye yow hom hastyly
and se your owne profyte your sylf. Pampyng and I shall clowt up your
howsys as we may with the money that we have tyll more come, but ye
shold do bettyr your sylf. I prey red thys byll onys on a day tyll ye
have sped thes maters wretyn her in; thowe it be to your peyne to labore
theym, remembyr your profyt. Nomor, &c., but God kep yow thys Lent fro
lollardy of fleshe. Wretyn at Norwyche the Twysday next aftyr that I
departyd fro yow.

  J. P.

    [Footnote 8-1: [Add. MS. 33,597, f. 4.] The year in which this
    letter was written is doubtful, but it was most probably either
    1468 or 1469, at the beginning of Lent.]


701

MARGARET PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[10-1]

_To Sir John Paston, knyght, be this delivered in hast._

[Sidenote: 1469 / MARCH 12]

I grete you wele and send you Goddes blyssyng and myn, desiryng you to
recomaund me to my brother William, and to comune with hym and your
councell in such materis as I wryght to you, that ther may be purveyd be
some writyng fro the Kyng that my Lord of Norffolk and his councell seas
[_cease_] of the wast that thei done in your lordsheps, and in especiall
at Heynford; for thei have felled all the wood, and this weke thei wull
carie it a wey, and lete renne the wateris and take all the fyssh. And
Sir William Yelverton and his sone William, John Grey and Burgeys,
William Yelvertons men, have ben at Guton and takyn distresses, and with
ought that [_unless_] thei wull pay them thei shall not set ought no
plow to till there lande; thei byd them lete there land lye on tilled
but if [_unless_] thei pay them. So that if the tenauntes have no remedy
that thei may pesibily, with ought assaught or distresse takyng, be the
seid Yelverton or his men, or of any other in there names, at there
liberte herye there landis, with in this vij. days there tylth in the
feldis be lost for all this yere and thei shall be on doon; and though
ye shuld kepe it here after pesibilly ye shuld lese the ferme of this
yere, for thei may not pay you but if [_unless_] thei may occupie there
landis; thei set not so sone a plow ought at ther gatis but ther is a
felesship redy to take it. And thei ride with speris and launyegays,
like men of werre, so that the seid tenauntis arn a ferd to kepe there
owyn howses. Therfore purvey an redy remedy, or ellis ye lese the
tenauntis hertis and ye gretly hurt; for it is gret pety to here the
swemefull[10-2] and petowse compleyntis of the pore tenauntis that come
to me for comfort and socour sometime vi. or vij. to geder. Therfore,
for Goddis love, se that thei ben helpyn, and desire my brothere William
to geve you good concell here.

Also it is told me that my Lady of Suffolk hath promysed you here good
will, if your bargayn of the mariage[11-1] holdyth, to do as largely as
she shall be disired, or largelyer if there be any appoyntment takyn a
twix you for any materes a twyx her and you. And [_i.e._ if] thei wuld
avyse you to geve any money to here to make here refuse or disclayme
here titill, me semyth ye may wele excuse you be the money that she had
last, and be the wrongis that were don be here and here men in fellyng
of wood and pullyng doune of your place and logge at Heylesdon, and
takyn a wey of the shep and your faderis goodis, which were takyn a wey
at the pullyn don of the seid place; wheche wele considered, she were
wurthy to recompense you. And [_if_] the Kyng and the lordis were wele
enformed thei wuld considere the redilyer your hurtis. It semyth this
Sir William Yelverton hath comfort that he is so bold, for [he[11-2]]
hath ryght prowde and fowle langage and ryght slaundrows to the
tenauntis, as thei have reported to me. Therfor be ryght ware that ye
bynde not your self nor mak non ensurance till ye be suer of a pesibill
possession of your lande; for oftyn tyme rape rueth, and whan a man hath
made such a covenante he must kepith it, he may not chese;
there[fore[11-2]] be not to hasty till your londe be clere. And labore
hastly a remedy for thes premysses, or ellis Sir John Fastolffis
lyvelode, though ye entre it pesibilly, shall not be worth to ye a grote
this yere with ought ye wull on do your tenauntis. I pray you remembre a
kerchye of Cremyll for your suster Anne. Remembre to labore some remedy
for your faderis will whill my Lord of Caunterbury[11-3] lyvyth, for he
is an old man and he is now frendly to you and if he happed to dye, how
[_who_] shuld come after hym ye wote never; and if he wer a nedy man, in
asmych as your fader was noysed of so greet valew he wull be the mor
straunge to entrete. And lete this be not for gete; for [if] ther were
on [_one_] that aught us no good wyll he myght calle us up to make
accounte of his goodis, and if we had not for to showe for us where by
we have occupied, he myght send doun assentence to curse us in all the
diosyse and to make us to delivere his goodis; which were to us a gret
shame, and a rebuke. There fore purvey hastly and wyssely therfore whill
he lyvyth, and do not as ye dede whill my Lord of York[12-1] was
Chanceller make delays, for if ye had labored in his tyme as ye have do
sith, ye had be thurgh in your materis; be ware be that, and lete slauth
nomor take you in such diffaught; thynk of after clappes and have
provysion in all your work, and ye shall do the better. God kepe you.
Wretyn on Myd Lent Sonday in hast.

  Be your moder,

  M. P.

    [Footnote 10-1: [Add. MS. 34,889, f. 202.] This letter must have
    been written in 1469, after the Duke of Norfolk and Sir William
    Yelverton had taken possession of Fastolf’s lands.]

    [Footnote 10-2: _swemeful_, sorrowful.--Halliwell.]

    [Footnote 11-1: With Anne Haute.]

    [Footnote 11-2: Omitted in MS.]

    [Footnote 11-3: Cardinal Bourchier.]

    [Footnote 12-1: George Nevill, Archbishop of York. He surrendered
    the Great Seal on the 8th June 1467.]

  [[ride with speris and launyegays
  _text unchanged; expected form is “launzegays” (launȝegays)_]]


702

CARDINAL BOURCHIER’S DECLARATION[12-2]

[Sidenote: 1469]

To all cristen men to whom this present writyng shall come, Thomas, by
the providence of God, Preeste Cardinall Archiebisshopp of Caunterbury,
Primat of all Inglond and Legat of the Appostallic See, gretyng. Where
now late Alice, Duchesse of Suffolk, come to us and desirid of us to
dismysse us of oure estate and to enseall a deed of a relees of the
maner of Haylysdon with the appurtenaunce in the counte of Norffolk;
which we denyed, in as myche as wee stode infeoffyd in the seid maner
with othirs to the use of Sir John Paston knyght, sone and heire to John
Paston sqwyer; to the whiche the seid Duchesse replied, seying and
affermyng that she was accordyd and agreed with the seid Sir John Paston
by the meane of the ryght Reverent fader in God, George Archebysshop of
York, and that the seid Sir John Paston was fully assented and agreed
that the seid Duchesse shuld have the seid manere wyth th’appurtenaunce
to hir, hir heyris and assignes for ever more, and that all the feoffees
enfeoffid and seisid in the seid manere wyth the appurtenaunce shuld
relees and make astate to hir or such as shee wolde assigne of the seid
manere wyth th’appurtenaunce; the wehych we answerde and seid upon
condicion that the seid Sir John Paston weere so agreed we wold relees
wyth a goodwyll, and els not; and yff so were that we cowde understand
hereafter by the seid Right reverent Fadir in God, George Archebisshop
of York, or by the seid Sir John Paston, that ther ware noon such
accorde made by twex the seid Duchesse and the seid Sir John, that than
oure deed and relees by us so ensealed off the seid maner wyth
th’appurtenaunce shuld stond as voyd, and of no force nor effecte; to
the wehyche the seid Duches agreed, and prayd us that we wold sealle hir
a deed of the same maner, wyche shee had theere redy, uppon the same
condicion and uppon noone other. And wee than, at hir specyall request
upon the condicion aforeseyd rehersid, sealid the seyd deed and
delyvered it; and the seid Duchesse at the same tyme promitted us that
she wold use and kepe the seid writyng noo notherwise, nor to noon othir
use but uppon the same condicion as is aforeseid. In witnesse whereoff,
to this oure present writyng we have sette oure seall.

    [Footnote 12-2: [Add. MS. 34,889, f. 127.] From what Margaret
    Paston writes to her son Sir John in the end of the last letter
    about his father’s will, and also from what she says a little
    later about the Duchess of Suffolk (_see_ page 15), we may assign
    this document with great probability to the year 1469.]

      [[_page 15 = Letter 704_]]


703

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[13-1]

_To myght’ well belovyd brother, John Paston, or to John Dawbeney, in
his absence._

[Sidenote: 1469 / MARCH 17]

Ryght worschypful and well belovyd brother, I comand me to yow, letyng
you wete that Sir Thomas Howes hadde a free chapell at Castr, wher of
the gyfte longyth to me, whyche chapell, as I understande, scholde be in
the olde tyme, er the place at Caster wer bylte, with in the motte,
wherfor I ame but the better pleased; and soo it is now that at the
speciall request of the Qwen and other especiall good Lordes of myn,
I have gevyn it to the berer her of, callyd Master John Yotton, a
chapleyn of the Qwenys. Neverthelle[ss] in tyme passyd I proposyd that
the master of the colegg scholde have hadd it, and so er longe to I hope
he schall, wherfor I thynke he most take possession, and that is the
cawse of hys comyng. Wherfor I pray yow make hym good cher. He is
informyd that it scholde be worthe C_s._ be yer, whyche I belyve not;
I thynke it der jnow xl_s._ by yeer. He most have it as it was hadde
befor.

Item, thys daye I understonde that ther be comen letteris from my moder
and yow, and Dawbeney, wherin I schall sende yow answer when I have seyn
them.

No mor at this tyme, for within this iij. dayes I shall lette yow have
kneleche of other maters.

Wretyn the xviij. day of Marche.

Whether he nedyth indoccion, or institucion, or non, I wot not; if it
nede, brother, ye may seale any suche thynge as well as I. Master Stevyn
kan tell all suche thynges.

  JOHN PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 13-1: [From Fenn, iv. 308.] Sir Thomas Howes appears
    to have died in the latter part of the year 1468. Before the end
    of that year his living of Pulham was vacant, and his death is
    alluded to in a letter of Margaret Paston’s, written on the 30th
    September 1469, as having occurred ‘within this twelvemonth.’ It
    would appear by the following extract, quoted by Fenn, from the
    Institution Books of the Bishop of Norwich, that Sir John’s
    presentation referred to in this letter was not allowed, or was
    not made out in time, and that the Bishop presented by a lapse:--

      ‘Cantaria in Cayster-hall.

    ‘Lib. xi. p. 170, 21 March 1468. Mr. Joh’es Yetton, S.T.P. ad
    col. Ep’i. per laps’.’]

  [[Sidenote: 1469 / MARCH 17
  _printed as shown, but text of letter says “xviij” (18)_]]


704

MARGARET PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[14-1]

_To Sir John Paston._

[Sidenote: 1469 / APRIL 3]

I grete you wele, and send you Godds blissyng and myn, thankyng you for
my seall that ye sent me; but I am right sory that ye dede so grete cost
ther up on, for on of xl_d._ should have served me right wele. Send me
ward what it cost you, and I shall send you money therfor. I send you a
letter be a man of Yarmoth; send me word if ye have it, for I marveyll
ye sent me non answer ther of be Juddy.

I have non very knowleche of your ensuraunce [_engagement_], but if ye
be ensured I pray God send you joy and wurchep to geder, and so I trost
ye shull have, if it be as it is reported of her[15-1]; and a nemps God,
ye arn as gretly bownd to her as ye were maried, and therfor I charge
you up on my blissyng, that ye be as trew to her as she wer maried on to
you in all degrees, and ye shall have the mor grace and the better spede
in all other thyngs.

Also, I wuld that ye shuld not be to hasty to be maried til ye wer more
suer of your lyvelode, for ye must remembr what charge ye shall have,
and if ye have not to mayntene it, it wull be gret rebuke; and therfor
labour that ye may have releses of the londs, and be in more suerte of
your lond, or than ye be maried.

The Duchesse of Suffolk[15-2] is at Ewhelm, in Oxford shir, and it is
thought be your frends her that it is do that she myght be ferr and
ought of the wey, and the rather feyne excuse be cause of age or
sikenesse, and if that the Kyng wuld send for her for your maters.

Your elmyse [_enemies_] be as bold her as thei wer befor, wherfor I can
not thynk but that thei have sume comfort. I sent to Cayster that thei
shuld be war in kepyng of the place, as ye dede wright to me. Hast you
to spede your maters as spedily ye can, that ye may have lesse felesshep
at Cayster, for the expences and costs be grete, and ye have no nede
therof and [_if_] ye remembre you wele what charges ye have beside, and
how your liffelode is dispoyled and wasted by your adversaries.

Also I wuld ye shuld purvey for your suster[15-3] to be with my Lady of
Oxford,[16-1] or with my Lady of Bedford,[16-2] or in sume other
wurchepfull place, wher as ye thynk best, and I wull help to her
fyndyng, for we be eyther of us werye of other. I shall tell you more
whan I speke with you. I pray you do your devyr her in as ye wull my
comfort and welefar, and your wurchep, for diverse causes which ye shall
understand afterward, &c.

I spake with the Lord Skales at Norwich, and thanked hym for the good
lordshep that he had shewed to you, and desired his Lordship to be your
contynuall good lord; and he swore be his trought he wold do that he
myght do for you; and he told me that Yelverton the Justice had spoke to
hym in your maters, but he told me not what; but I trow, and ye desired
hym to telle you, he wuld. Ye ar be holdyng to my Lord of his good
report of you in this contre, for he reported better of you than I trow
ye deserve. I felt be hym that ther hath be profered hym large proferes
on your adversaries parte ageyn you.

Send me word as hastly as ye may after the begynnyng of the terme, how
ye have sped in all your maters, for I shall thynk right long till I her
sume good tidyngs.

Item, I pray you recomaund me to the good mayster[16-3] that ye gaffe to
the chapell of Cayster, and thank hym for the gret cost that he dede on
me at Norwych; and if I wer a grette lady he shuld understand that he
shuld far the better for me, for me semyth be his demenyng he shuld be
right a good man.

Item, I send you the nowche[16-4] with the dyamaunch, be the berer
herof. I pray yow forgate not to send me a kersche[16-5] of Cr’melle for
nekkerchys for your syster Anne, for I am schente of the good lady that
sche is with, be cawse she hathe non, and I can non gette in all thys
towne.

I xuld wrythe mor to yow but for lakke of leyser. God have yow in Hys
kepyng, and send yow good spede in alle your maters. Wryten in haste on
Eestern Munday.

  Be your Moder.

    [Footnote 14-1: [From Fenn, iv. 312.] Allusion is made in this and
    the next letter to the expected visit of Edward IV. to Norfolk in
    1469. Owing to the proposed marriage of Sir John Paston with his
    kinswoman, Anne Haute, Lord Scales appears at this time to have
    interested himself in Sir John’s behalf. On the back of this
    letter, as Fenn tells us, is a note: ‘The L. Scales is now frend
    to Sr. J. Paston.’ But the handwriting is not contemporaneous.]

    [Footnote 15-1: The lady here referred to is Anne Haute.]

    [Footnote 15-2: Alice, widow of William de la Pole, Duke of
    Suffolk.]

    [Footnote 15-3: This was most probably Margery Paston, with whom
    the whole family were, very soon after the writing of this letter,
    so much displeased for having without their consent contracted
    herself in marriage to Richard Calle.--F.]

    [Footnote 16-1: Elizabeth, the daughter of Sir John Howard,
    Knight, and widow of John de Vere, Earl of Oxford, who was
    beheaded in 1461-2.--F.]

    [Footnote 16-2: _See_ vol. iv. p. 188, Note 3.]

    [Footnote 16-3: Dr. John Yotton. _See_ No. 703.]

    [Footnote 16-4: An ouch is a collar of gold, formerly worn by
    women; a gold button, set with some jewel, is likewise so called,
    and that most probably was the ornament here mentioned to be sent
    to Sir John by his mother; we may suppose it was intended as a
    present to his betrothed bride.--F.]

    [Footnote 16-5: A kersche of Cr’melle, perhaps means a kerchief of
    Cremell, crewel or worsted, to be made into neck-handkerchiefs for
    her daughter Anne, who appears to have been for education and
    board with some lady of consequence.--F.]


705

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[17-1]

_To Master Syr John Paston._

[Sidenote: 1469 / APRIL 7]

Syr, I pray yow recomand me to my Lord Scalys good lordshep, and to let
hym weet that, in lyek wyse as hys Lordshep gave me in comandement,
I have enqweryd what the gentyllmanys answer was that my Lord of
Norffolk sent to to awayte up on hym at the Kyngs comyng in to thys
contre. Hys answer was to my Lord of Norfolks messenger, that he had
promysyd my Lord Scalys to awayte up on hym at the same seson, and in as
myche as he had promysyd my Lord Scalys, he wold not false hys promesse
for no man on lyve. I fond the menys that the seyd gentylemanys wyfe
mevyd hyr husbend with the same mater as thow she had axyd hym of hyr
awne hed, and he told hyr that he had gevyn thys answer. Thys gentylman
is Sir William Calthorp;[17-2] but I pray yow tell my Lord Scalys that
ye undyrstand not who it is, for he preyid me to be secret ther in.

I pray with all my hart, hye yow hom in hast, for we thynk longe tyll ye
coome. And I pray yow send me woord whedyr ye shall be mad a Crysten man
or ye com home, or nowt; and if so be that ye send eny man hom hastly,
I pray yow send me an hat and a bonet by the same man, and let hym bryng
the hat upon hys hid for mysfacyonyng of it. I have ned to bothe, for I
may not ryd nor goo owt at the doorys with non that I have, they be so
lewde [_shabby_]. A murry bonet, and a blak or a tawny hat. And God send
yow your desyr. Wretyn at Caster, the viij. day of Apryll.

  Your J. PASTON.

    [Footnote 17-1: [From Fenn, iv. 318.] For the date of this letter
    see preliminary note to the last (p. 14, Note 1).]

    [Footnote 17-2: Sir William Calthorpe, Knight, had been High
    Sheriff of Norfolk and Suffolk, both in this and the preceding
    reign, and died very old in 1494. His second wife was Elizabeth,
    daughter and co-heir of Sir Miles Stapleton, Knight, of
    Ingham.--F.]

  [[Sidenote: 1469 / APRIL 7
  _printed as shown, but text of letter says “viij” (8)_]]


706

LORD SCALES TO THE COUNCIL OF THE DUKE OF NORFOLK[18-1]

Ih’s.

[Sidenote: 1469 / APRIL 10]

Wyrshypfull and my ryght gode frend, I comaund me to you. And where as I
am enformed that my Lorde of Norffolk pretendeth title to serteyn londys
of Sir John Pastons whych were late of Sir John Fastolf, it is sayd that
by the comaundement and supportacyon of my sayd Lord, sertayn hys
servaunts felleth wode, maketh grete wast, and destrayned the tenants of
the seyd lands, to the grete damage of the seyd Sir John Paston and hys
sayd tenants; and also that my sayd Lord entendyth to entre sertayn
places of the same. And for asmoch as maryage ys fully concluded by twyx
the seyd Sir John Paston and on of my nerrest kynneswomen, I dout not
that your reason wele conceyveth that nature must compelle me the rather
to shewe my gode wylle, assystens, and favour unto the seyd Sir John in
such thyngs as concerne hys enherytans. And because I am on of my said
Lordys councayll, and must and will tendre hys honour, I hertely pray
you that it may lyke you to advertyse and avyse my sayd Lord and yourys,
that all such entres, fellyng of wode, destraynyngs of tenants, and all
such maters lyke touchyng the sayd londes or any part of them, be cessyd
unto such tyme as a resonabell meane may be founde by my sayd Lords
counsayll, my Lord my faders[19-1] and other cousyns and frendes of my
seyd kynneswoman thys next terme, as may be to my sayd Lordys honour,
and to the savyng of the ryght tytle of the seyd Sir John Paston.

Over thys I pray you that ye wille enforme my gode frend James Hobard of
the premysses, that he may advertyse my seyd Lord in lyke wyse; and that
ye will yeve credens unto William Paston, and I shal be welwilled to do
that may be to your plesur, with Godds mercy.

Fro Westmynstre, the x. day of Apryll.

    [Footnote 18-1: [From Fenn, iv. 322.] This and the following
    letter were printed by Fenn from contemporaneous copies, written
    on the same paper without signature or address. On the back,
    however, is the following memorandum:--‘Copea litērz Dñi de
    Scales;’ to which has been added in a later handwriting: ‘ad
    Conciliū Duc’ Norff’ et aliis (_sic_) in favore J. Paston mil. eo
    quod maritaret cognatā suam Annā Hawte.’ The date is clearly in
    the year 1469, when the Duke of Norfolk laid claim to Caister.]

    [Footnote 19-1: Richard Woodville, Earl Rivers.]


707

LORD SCALES TO ----[19-2]

[Sidenote: 1469 / APRIL 10]

Ryght trusty and welbelovyd, I grete you well. And for asmoch as a
maryage ys fully concluded bytwyx Sir John Paston and my ryght nere
kynneswoman Hawte, I will that ye and all other my servaunts and tenants
understand that my Lord, my fader,[19-3] and I must of nature and reason
shewe unto hym our gode assystens and favour in such maters as he shall
have a doo. Wherfor I pray you hertely that ye will take the labour to
come to Norwych, to comen with William Paston, and to yeve credens unto
hym in such maters as he shall enforme you of myne entent, and of
sertayn persones with whom ye shall comen by th’avyse of the seyd
William Paston, of such maters as touch the sayd Sir John Paston; prayng
you to tendre thys mater as ye wolde do myne owne.

Fro Westmynstre, the x. day of Aprill.

    [Footnote 19-2: [From Fenn, iv. 324.] _See_ preliminary note to
    the last letter (p. 18, Note 1).]

    [Footnote 19-3: _See_ Note 1, _supra_.]

  [[Sidenote: 1469 / APRIL 10
  _sidenote missing in original: date supplied from body of letter_]]


708

ABSTRACT[20-1]

[Sidenote: 1469 / MAY 5]

Citation by Thomas, Cardinal Archbishop of Canterbury, to William
[Waynflete], Bishop of Winchester, and John Beauchamp, Knight, Lord
Beauchamp, to appear before the Archbishop in fifteen days after being
summoned, and take upon them the charge of the execution of Sir John
Fastolf’s will, if they so will to do.

Lambeth, 5th May 1469, in the 15th year of the Archbishop’s translation.

  [The MS. belongs to the Castle Combe Collection.]

    [Footnote 20-1: [Add. Charter, 18,249, B.M.]]


709

ARCHBISHOP NEVILL TO SIR JOHN PASTON[20-2]

_To my right trusty and welbeloved Sir John Paston._

Ih’s.

[Sidenote: 1469(?) / MAY 7]

Right trusty and welbeloved, I grete you hertely well, and sende you by
Thomas your childe xx.^li., prayng you to spare me as for eny more at
this tyme, and to hold you content with thessame, as my singlr truste is
in you; and I shalle within bref tyme ordeigne and purveye for you such
as shalbe unto your pleasir, with the grace of Almightty God, who have
you in His proteccion and keping.

Writen in the manoir of the Mor[20-3] the vij^th daye of Maye.

  G. EBORAC.

    [Footnote 20-2: [From Fenn, ii. 34.] This letter was almost
    certainly written between the years 1467 and 1469, and is not
    unlikely to be of the latter year, before the Nevills and the
    Archbishop had come to be regarded as open enemies of Edward IV.]

    [Footnote 20-3: The Moor in Hertfordshire, a seat of Archbishop
    Nevill.]


710

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[21-1]

[Sidenote: 1469 / [MAY]]

Syr, plesyth it to undyrstand, that I conceyve, by your lettyr whyche
that ye sent me by Jwde, that ye have herd of R. C.[21-2] labor whyche
he makyth by our ungracyous sustyrs[21-3] assent; but wher as they wryet
that they have my good wyll ther in, savyng your reverence, they falsly
lye of it, for they never spake to me of that mater, ner non othyr body
in ther name. Lovell axyd me onys a qwestyon whedyr that I undyrstood
how it was betwyx R. C. and my suster. I can thynk that it was by Callys
menys, for when I axyd hym whedyr C. desyird hym to meve me that
qwestyon or not, he wold have gotyn it aweye by humys and by hays, but I
wold not so be answeryd; wherfor at the lest he told me that hys oldest
sone desyird hym to spere [_inquire_] whedyr that R. C. wes swyr of hyr
or nowt, for he seyd that he knew a good maryage for hyr, but I wot he
lyeyd, for he is hole with R. Cale in that mater. Wherfor to the entent
that he nor they sholl pyck no comfort of me, I answerd hym, that and my
fadyr, whom God asoyle, wer a lyve, and had consentyd ther to, and my
modyr, and ye bothe, he shold never have my good wyll for to make my
sustyr to selle kandyll and mustard in Framlyngham; and thus, wythe mor
whyche wer to longe to wryet to you, we departyd.

And wher as it plesythe you in your lettyr to crye me mercy for that ye
sent me not syche ger as I sent yow mony for, I crye yow mercy that I
was so lewde [_bold_] to encomber yow with eny so sympyll a mater,
consyderyng the grette maters and weyghty that ye have to doo; but need
compellyd me, for in thys contre is no syche stuffe as I sent to yow
for.

Also, wher as it plesyth yow to send to Rychard Calle to delyver me
monye, so God help me, I wyll non axe hym for my sylfe, nor non had I of
hym, nor of non othyr man but of myne owne, syne ye depertyd; but that
lytyll that I myght forbere of myne owne, I have delyveryd to Dawbeney
for howsold, and pay it for yow in menys wagys; and ther for who ever
sendys yow word that I have spent yow eny mony syne ye went hens, they
must geve yow an othyr reknyng, savyng in met and drynk, for I eete lyek
an horse, of purpose to eete yow owte at the dorys. But that nedythe
not, for ye com not within them; wherfor, so God help me, the felaushep
her thynkys that ye have forgetyn us alle. Wherfor and eny thyng be ille
rewlyd when ye come home, wyet it [_impute it to_] your selfe for defawt
of oversyght.

Also, I undyrstand for verry se[r]teyn, and it is sent me so woord owt
of my Lordys howse, that thys Pentcost is my Lordys consell at
Framlyngham, and they purpose thys week and the next to hold coortys her
at Caster, and at all othyr maners that wer Sir John F.,[22-1] and
purchasyd of Yelverton and of Syr T. H.,[22-2] whom God asoyle, and how
that my demenyng sholbe, it is to late to send to yow for avyse;
wherfor, and I do well I axe no thank, and if I do ille, I pray yow
leythe the defawt on over lytyll wyte, but I purpose to use the fyrst
poynt of hawkyng, to hold fast and I maye; but so God help me, and they
myght pulle downe the howse on our hedys, I wyet [_blame_] hem not,
whyche I trust to God to help hem from; for by God that bowght me, the
best Erle in Inglond wold not dele so with my Lord and my Lady as ye do,
withowt makyng of some menys to them; so God help me, whoso ever avyse
yow to do so, he is not your frend. And I may, I trust to God to se yow
abowght Mydsomer or befor, for in good feythe I wene ye purpose yow that
it shall be Estern er ye come hom, for all your servants her wen [_here
ween_] that ye purpose ne more to dele with them, but to leve hem her
[_here_] in ostage to my Lord of Norfolk.

Also, syr, I pray yow purvey what Ine that my brodyr Edmund shall be in,
for he losythe sore hys tyme her, I promyse yow; I pray yow send me word
by the next messenger that comyth, and I shall eythyr send hym or bryng
hym up with me to London.

Also, syr, we pore _sanz deners_ of Castr have brook iij. or iiij.
stelle bowys; wherfor we beseche yow, and ther be eny maker of steele
bowys in London whyche is very kunnyng, that ye wyll send me woord, and
I shall send yow the bowys that be broken, whyche be your owne greet
bowe, and Roberd Jacksonys bowe, and Johon Pampyngs bowe; thes iij. have
kast so many calvys, that they shall never cast qwarellys[23-1] tyll
they be new mad.

I praye yow fynd the menys that my Lord have some resonable meane
profyrd, so that he and my Lady may undyrstand that ye desyr to have hys
good lordshep. I promyse yow it shall do yow ease and your tenaunts
bothe, and God preserve.

  J. P.

    [Footnote 21-1: [From Fenn, iv. 344.] This letter appears by the
    contents to have been written a little before Whitsuntide after
    the death of Sir Thomas Howes, and when the Duke of Norfolk was
    preparing to make good a claim to the manor of Caister, which, as
    we shall see, he regularly besieged and took in September 1469.
    The date is therefore certain.]

    [Footnote 21-2: Richard Calle’s.]

    [Footnote 21-3: Margery Paston.]

    [Footnote 22-1: Fastolf’s.]

    [Footnote 22-2: Sir Thomas Howes.]

    [Footnote 23-1: _See_ vol. ii. p. 101, Note 3.]

  [[Footnote 21-2
  Richard Calle’s.
  _final . missing or invisible_]]


711

ROBERT BROWNE TO SIR JOHN PASTON[23-2]

_To the right worshipful Sir John Paston knyght be this delivered._

[Sidenote: 1469]

Right worshipfull Sire, I recommaunde me to you, &c., certefying you
for certeyn that the kyng sent a lettre unto my Lord of Norffolk for to
contenue all maner of materes unto suche tyme as he sholl take a
direction therin, as I am enformed by Master Haute, and by a messenger
of his owne [it was sent[23-3]], &c. Acordyng to the same entent and the
rehersall by estimacion by cause the Secretary of his Clerkes was with
the Kyng the Quene hath sent a[24-1] lettre unto my Lady of Norffolk and
a nother lettre unto my Lady of Suffolk the elder, desyeryng theym to
common with my lordis that all such materis as the Kyng wrote unto them
fore mabe kept so that no defaute be founden in them, as ye may
understand by youre lettre sent frome the Quene, &c. Also Roger Ree the
Shirereve of the Shire wilbe at Caster, as my Lord Tresourer told me,
upon Tuesday or Wedynsday, to se that goode rule be kept. Also my Lord
of York[24-2] sendis you a lettre, &c. My Lord Scalez is with the Kyng,
&c. I take unto the brynger herof xx_s._ that is sufficaunt as he wille
telle you, also the secretarye, vj_s._ viij_d._ As for all othere
materes for haste I contenue unto that I may have leyser to write to
you. I pray you to recommaunde me to my mastres your moder. At London
upon Sonday in hast.

  ROBERT BROWNE.

  The letter is endorsed in another hand:--

  ‘The Counsell of my Lord of Suffolk, Robert Harlesdon. The Counsell
  of my Lord of Norffolk, Sir Thomas Walgrave, knyght [sergeant at]
  lawe and Richard Southwell and to everiche of them.’

    [Footnote 23-2: [Add. MS. 33,889, f. 70.] The date of this letter
    is fixed by Roger Ree being Sheriff of Norfolk, which he was from
    November 1468 to November 1469. The time would seem to be April or
    May 1469, when the Duke of Norfolk was proposing to take forcible
    possession of Caister.]

    [Footnote 23-3: These words are interlined before ‘&c.,’ but
    possibly are intended to be read with the next sentence, which is
    difficult to construe, there being no punctuation in the MS.]

    [Footnote 24-1: Before the word ‘a’ ‘nothere’ is interlined,
    probably by inadvertence.]

    [Footnote 24-2: Archbishop Nevill.]


712

ABSTRACT[24-3]

RICHARD CALLE TO SIR JOHN PASTON

[Sidenote: 1469 / MAY 22]

I would have been with you on Sunday before Ascension Day, had I
received any command to that effect. Henry Wheler told me my day of the
surety of peace was _quindena Trinitatis_, ‘and thereof he made me a
bill. He is foully to blame to serve me so.’ I am much bound to you,
nevertheless, for the safeguard of my sureties. Gives an account of
monies disbursed since parting with Sir John at London. Repaid ‘my
mistress’ 66_s._ 8_d._, part of 100_s._ she lent for Mariot’s matter.
Paid Dawbeney for household since Midlent, 30_s._ Received from the
farmer of the dairy, £11, 11_s._ 4_d._ Delivered ‘to the master of the
college onward for his hire,’ 50_s._ Has received of Paston’s ‘lifelode’
since he came from London but £18, 10_s._ Has spent £12, 10_s._ more
than he received, and has borrowed of John Wellys and others. Could
borrow nothing of Mr. William. ‘And of all this twelvemonth I have not
had one penny for my wages. There is none of them that hath purveyed nor
chevised have so much as I have done. Here is no man paid of their
wages, but all spent in household.’ Cannot get a penny in all Suffolk or
Flegge, of Paston’s ‘lifelode,’ nor in Boyton nor Heyneford. Can get
money only at Gughton, which I must gather myself, for the bailiff will
not come there. Much malt made, which had better be sold to pay the
men’s wages, who complain grievously, ‘and the master of the college and
Sir John Stille both.’ Will obtain for Dawbeney in ten days 6 or 7 marks
more, which should keep the household for the next seven or eight weeks.
The price of malt is but 20_d._ a quarter, but it would be better to
sell some than that the men should be unpaid. Wonders he has no word
from him about letting Spoorle. Cannot give Mariot an estate in Bekham
as Paston directs, for Paston has the deed which James Andrewes sealed,
but will talk with him and see how he is disposed; for it would be well
that Paston were through with him. He is not trusty, but seeks pretexts
for delay. Jekson’s crossbow is broken. Shall he send it to London to be
mended?

Caster, Monday in Pentecost week.

  [The mention of Jekson’s crossbow being broken proves this letter
  to be of the year 1469. Compare No. 710, p. 23.]

    [Footnote 24-3: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]


713

RICHARD CALLE TO MARGERY PASTON[25-1]

[Sidenote: 1469]

Myn owne lady and mastres, and be for God very trewe wyff, I with herte
full sorowefull recomaunde me unto you, as he that can not be mery, nor
nought shalbe tyll it be othewise with us then it is yet, for thys lyf
that we lede nough is nowther plesur to Godde nor to the worlde,
consederyng the gret bonde of matrymonye that is made be twix us, and
also the greete love that hath be, and as I truste yet is be twix us,
and as on my parte never gretter; wherfor I beseche Almyghty Godde
comfort us as sone as it plesyth Hym, for we that ought of very ryght to
be moost to gether ar moost asondre; me semyth it is a m^ll.
[_thousand_] yere a goo son that I speke with you. I had lever thenne
all the goode in the worlde I myght be with you. Alas, alas! goode lady,
full litell remembre they what they doo that kepe us thus asunder; iiij.
tymes in the yere ar they a cursid that lette matrymonye; it causith
many men to deme in hem they have large consyence in other maters as
wele as herin. But what lady suffre as ye have do; and make you as mery
as ye can, for I wys, lady, at the longe wey Godde woll of Hys ryght
wysnes helpe Hys servants that meane truly, and wolde leve accordyng to
Hes lawys, &c.

I undrestende, lady, ye have hadde asmoche sorwe for me as any
gentelwoman hath hadde in the worlde, aswolde Godd all that sorwe that
ye have hadde had rested upon me, so that ye hadde be discharged of it,
for I wis, lady, it is to me a deethe to her that ye be entreted other
wise thene ye ought to be. This is a peyneful lyfe that we lede. I can
not leve thus withoute it be a gret displesure to Godde.

Also like you to wete that I had sent you a letter be my ladde from
London, and he tolde me he myght not speeke with you, ther was made so
gret awayte upon hym and upon you boothe. He told me John Threscher come
to hym in your name, and seide that ye sent hym to my ladde for a letter
or a token, weche I shulde have sent you, but he truste hym not; he wold
not delyver hym noon. After that he brought hym a rynge, seyng that ye
sent it hym, comaundyng hym that he schulde delyver the letter or token
to hym, weche I conceyve sethen be my ladde it was not be your sendyng,
it was be my mastres and Sir Jamys[26-1] a vys. Alas, what meane they? I
suppose they deeme we be not ensuryd to gether, and if they so doo I
merveyll, for thene they ar not wele avised, remembryng the pleynes that
I breke to my mastres at the begynnyng, and I suppose be you bothe, and
ye dede as ye ought to do of very ryght; and if ye have do the contrare,
as I have be enformed ye have do, ye dede nouther concyensly nor to the
plesure of Godde, withoute ye dede it for feere, and for the tyme to
please suche as were at that tyme a boute you; and if ye so dede it for
this service it was a resonable cause, consederyng the grete and
importable callyng upon that ye hadde, and many an on trewe tale was
made to you of me, weche God knowt I was never gylty of.

My ladde tolde me that my mastres your modre axyd hym if he hadde
brought any letter to you, and many other thyngs she bare hym on
hande,[27-1] and a monge all other at the last she seide to hym that I
wolde not make her prevy to the begynnyng, but she supposyd I wolde at
the endyng; and as to that, God knowt sche knewe furst of me and non
other. I wott not what her mastreschip meneth, for be my trowthe ther is
no gentylwoman on lyve that my herte tendreth more then it dothe her,
nor is lother to displese, savyng only your person, weche of very ryght
I ought to tendre and love beste, for I am bounde therto be the lawe of
Godde, and so wol do whyle that I leve, what so ever falle of it.
I supose, and ye telle hem sadly the trouthe, they wold not dampne ther
soules for us; though I telle hem the trouthe they woll not be leve me
as weele as they woll do you; and ther for, goode lady, at the reverence
of Godde be pleyne to hem and telle the trouthe, and if they woll in no
wise agree therto, betwix God, the Deelf, and them be it, and that
perell that we schuld be in, I beseche Godde it may lye upon them and
not upon us. I am hevy and sory to remembre ther disposicion, God sende
them grace to gyde all thyngs weele, as wele I wolde they dede; Godde be
ther gide, and sende them peas and reste, &c.

I mervell moche that they schulde take this mater so heedely as I
undrestonde they doo, remembryng it is in suche case as it can not be
remedyed, and my desert upon every be halfe it is for to be thought ther
shulde be non obstacle a yenst it; and also the worchipfull that is in
them, is not in your mariage, it is in ther owne mariage, weche I
beseche Godde sende hem suche as may be to ther worschip and plesur to
Godde, and to ther herts ease, for ell[es] were it gret pety. Mastres,
I am aferde to write to you, for I undrestonde ye have schewyd my
letters that I have sent you be for this tyme; but I prey you lete no
creatur se this letter. As sone as ye have redde it lete it be brent,
for I wolde no man schulde se it in no wise; ye had no wrytyng from me
this ij. yere, nor I wolle not sende you no mor, therfor I remytte all
this matre to your wysdom. Almyghty Jesu preserve, kepe, and [give] you
your hertys desire, weche I wotte weele schulde be to Goods plesur, &c.

Thys letter was wreten with as greete peyne as ever wrote I thynge in my
lyfe, for in goode feyth I have be ryght seke, and yet am not veryly
weele at ease, God amend it, &c.

    [Footnote 25-1: [From Fenn, iv. 350.] This letter was evidently
    written about the same period as No. 710. The original appears to
    have had no address, although Fenn prints one in the right-hand
    copy; but on the back was the following memorandum, evidently not
    quite contemporary: ‘Litera Ric’i Calle Margeriæ Paston filiæ
    Joh’is Paston ar’i quam postea duxit in uxorem.’]

    [Footnote 26-1: Sir James Gloys, a priest.]

    [Footnote 27-1: _See_ vol. ii. p. 110, Note 1.]

  [[me semyth it is a m^ll. [_thousand_]
  _final italic “d” misprinted as “a”_]]


714

JAMES HAWTE TO SIR JOHN PASTON[28-1]

_To my worchypfull brother, Sir John Paston, be thys byll delyvered in
hast._

[Sidenote: 1469 / MAY 22]

Ryght worchipfull brother, I recomaund me onto you, lettyng you to
wytte, that my Lorde Stafford[28-2] was made Erle of Deveneschere apon
Sonday; and as for the Kyng, as I understond, he departyt [_departeth_]
to Walsynggame apon Fryday com vij. nygth, and the Quene also, yf God
send hyr good hele.

And as for the Kyng [he] was apoyntyd to goo to Calys, and now hyt ys
pute of. And also as for the goyng to the see, my Lord of Warwyke
schyppys gothe to the see, as I understond. None other tydynggys I can
none wryte unto you, but Jesu have you in Hys kepyng.

Wretyn at Wyndysore on Monday after Whytsonday, in hast, &c.

  By your brother,

  JAMES HAWTE.

    [Footnote 28-1: [From Fenn, ii. 16.] The King’s visit to Norfolk
    and the creation of Lord Stafford as Earl of Devonshire both fix
    the date of this letter as 1469. The writer seems to be the
    brother of Anne Hawte, to whom Sir John Paston was engaged, and he
    accordingly calls him his brother.]

    [Footnote 28-2: Humphrey Stafford, Lord Stafford of Southwick, was
    created Earl of Devonshire on Sunday, 7th May 1469; so that the
    writer ought to have said, not ‘upon Sunday,’ but ‘upon Sunday
    fortnight.’]


715

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[29-1]

_To my Modr, and to my brother, John Paston._

[Sidenote: 1469 / JUNE]

Brother, it is so that the Kyng schall come in to Norffolk in hast, and
I wot nat whethyr that I may come with hym or nowt; if I come I most do
make a livere of xx^ti gownes, whyche I most pyke owt by your advyse;
and as for clothe for suche persones as be in that contre, if it myght
be had ther at Norwyche, or not, I wot not; and what persones I am not
remembryd.

If my modre be at Caster, as ther schall be no dowt for the kepyng of
the place whyl the Kynge is in that contre, that I may have the most
parte at Caster; and whether ye woll offre your selfe to wayte uppon the
Lorde of Norfolk or not, I wolde ye dyde that best wer to do; I wolde do
my Lorde plesur and servyse, and so I wolde ye dyde, if I wyst to be sur
of hys gode lordeschyp in tyme to kome. He schall have CC. in a lyverye
blewe and tawny, and blew on the leffte syde, and bothe darke colors.

I pray yow sende me worde, and your advyse by Judd of what men and what
horse I cowde be purveyd off, if so be that I most nedys kome, and of
your advyse in all thyngs be wryghtyng, and I schall send yow hastely
other tydyngs. Late Sorell be well kept.

  JOHN PASTON, Kt.

    [Footnote 29-1: [From Fenn, ii. 22.] This letter must have been
    written in the beginning of June 1469. Edward IV., as appears by
    the dates of his privy seals, was at Windsor on the 29th May and
    at Norwich on the 19th June in that year. Fenn says he was also in
    Norfolk in the year 1474, but I can find no evidence of the fact.]


716

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[30-1]

[Sidenote: 1469 / JUNE]

To begyn, God yeld yow for my hatys. The Kyng hathe ben in this contre,
and worchepfully receyvyd in to Norwyche, and had ryght good cher and
gret gyftys in thys contre, wherwythe he holdyth hym so well content
that he wyll hastyly be her agayn, and the Qwen allso, with whom, by my
power avyse, ye shall com, if so be that the terme be do by that tym
that she com in to this contre. And as for yowr maters her, so God help
me, I have don as myche as in me was, in laboryng of theym, as well to
my Lord Revers[30-2] as to my Lord Scalys,[30-3] Syr John Wydwyll,[30-4]
Thomas Wyngfeld, and othyr abowt the Kyng. And as for the Lord Revers,
he seyd to myn oncyll William, Fayrfax, and me, that he shold meve the
Kyng to spek to the two Dukys of Norffolk and Suffolk, that they shold
leve of ther tytyls of syche lond as wer Syr John Fastolfs. And if so be
that they wold do nowt at the Kyngs reqwest, and then the Kyng shold
comand theym to do no wasts, nor mak non assawtys nor frayis upon your
tenants nor plasys, tyll syche tym as the lawe hathe determynd with yow
or ayenst yow; this was seyd by hym the sam day in the mornyng that he
depertyd at noon. Whedyr he meved the Kyng with it or nowt I can not
sey, myn oncyll Wyllyam thynkys naye. And the same aftyr none folowyng I
told my Lord Scalys that I had spokyn with my Lord hys fadyr, in lyek
forme as I have rehersyd, and axyd hym whedyr that my Lord hys fadyr had
spokyn to the Kyng or nowt, and he gave me thys answer, that whedyr he
had spokyn to the Kyng or nowt, that the mater shold do well inow.

Thomas Wygfeld told me, and swore on to me, that when Brandon meuvyd the
Kyng, and besowght hym to shew my Lord favour in hys maters ayenst yow,
that the Kyng seyd on to hym ayen, ‘Brandon, thow thou can begyll the
Dwk of Norffolk, and bryng hym abow the thombe as thow lyst, I let the
wet thow shalt not do me so; for I undyrstand thy fals delyng well
inow.’ And he seyd on to hym, more over, that if my Lord of Norffolk
left not of hys hold of that mater, that Brandon shold repent itt, every
vayn in hys hert, for he told hym that he knew well inow that he myght
reauyll [_rule_] my Lord of Norffolk as he wold; and if my Lord dyd eny
thyng that wer contrary to hys lawys, the Kyng told hym he knew well
inow that it was by no bodys menys but by hys; and thus he depertyd fro
the Kyng.

Item, as by wordys, the Lord Scalys and Syr John Wydwyll tok tendyr your
maters mor then the Lord Revers.

Item, Syr John Wydvyll told me, when he was on horsbak at the Kyngs
depertyng, that the Kyng had comandyd Brandon of purpose to ryd forthe
fro Norwych to Lyne, for to tak a conclusyon in your mater for yow; and
he bad me that I shold cast no dowghtys but that ye shold have your
entent, and so dyd the Lord Scalys also; and when that I preyd them at
eny tyme to shew ther favor to your mater, they answered that it was
ther mater as well as yours, consyderyng, the alyans[31-1] betwyx yow.
Comon with Jakys Hawt, and he shall tell yow what langage was spekyn
betwen the Duk of Suffolks consell, and hym, and me; it is to long to
wryght, but I promyse yow ye ar be held to Jakys, for he sparyd not to
spek.

Item, the Kyng rod thorow Heylysdon Waren towads Walsyngham, and Thomas
Wyngfeld promysyd me that he wold fynd the menys that my Lord of
Glowsestyr[31-2] and hym sylf bothe shold shew the Kyng the loge that
was breke down, and also that they wold tell hym of the brekyng down of
the plase. Contrary to thys maters, and all the comfort that I had of my
Lord Scalys, Sir John Wydvyll, and Thomas Wyngfeld, myn oncyll Wylliam
sethe that the Kyng told hym hys owne mowthe, when he had redyn for by
the loge in Heylysdon Waren, that he supposyd as well that it myght fall
downe by the self as be plukyd downe, for if it had be plukyd down, he
seyd that we myght have put in our byllys of it, wehn hys jugys sat on
the _oyeer determyner_ in Norwyche, he beyng ther. And then myn oncyll
seythe how that he answered the Kyng, that ye trustyd to hys good grace
that he shold set yow thorow with both the Dwkys, by mene of trete; and
he seythe that the Kyng answerd hym that he wold neythyr tret nor spek
for yow, but for to let the lawe proced, and so he seyth that they
depertyd. And by my trowthe, and my Lord Tresorer encorage you not more
than he dyd us her, ye shall have but esy [_indifferent_] help as on
that party. Wherfor labor your maters effectually; for by my trowthe it
is nedy[s], for, for all ther wordys of plesur, I cannot undyrstand what
ther labor in thys contre hathe don good; wherfor be not ovyr swyft tyll
ye be swyr of your lond, but labor sore the lawe, for by my trowthe tyll
that be passyd with yow, ye get but esy help as I can undyrstand.

I had with me on day at dener in my modyrs plase, she beyng owt, the
Lord Scalys, Sir John Wydvyll, Sir John Haward, Nicolas Haward, John of
Par, Thomas Gornet, Foscwe, Cheyny, Trussell, the Knyghts son, Thomas
Boleyn, _qua propter_, Brampton, Barnard, and Broun, Perse, Howse, W.
Tonstale, Lewes Debretayll, and othyr, and mad hem good cher, so as they
held them content.

Item, my Lord of Norffolk gave Bernard, Broom, nor me no gownys at thys
seson, wherfor I awaytyd not on hym; notwithstandyng I ofyrd my servyse
for that seson to my Lady, but it was refusyd, I wot by avyse; wherfor I
purpose no more to do so. As for Bernard, Barney, Broom, and W.
Calthorp, ar sworn my Lord of Glowsetyrs men, but I stand yet at large;
not withstandyng my Lord Scalys spok to me to be with the Kyng, but I
mad no promes so to be, for I told hym that I was not woorthe a groote
withowt yow, and therfor I wold mak no promes to nobody tyll they had
your good wyll fyrst; and so we depertyd.

It was told me that ther was owt a preve seall for yow to attend upon
the Kyng northeward; and if it be so, I thynk veryly it is do to have
yow fro London be craft, that ye shold not labor your maters to a
conclusyon thys terme, but put them [in] delaye. I pray yow purvey yow
on it to be at hom as sone as the terme is doone, for be God I take gret
hurt for myn absence in dyvers plasys, and the most part of your men at
Caster wyll deperte withowt abod, and ye be not at hom within thys
fortnyght. I pray yow bryng hom poynts and lasys of sylk for yow and me.

  J. P.

    [Footnote 30-1: [From Fenn, iv. 334.] Edward IV. arrived at
    Norwich in the middle of the month of June 1469. There are privy
    seals dated at Bury on the 15th and 16th of the month, at Norwich
    on the 19th and 21st, at Walsingham on the 21st and 22nd, at Lynn
    on the 26th, and at Stamford on the 5th July. Edward did not
    return with the Queen as he intended, but she visited Norwich
    without him a little later. See a paper on the subject of her
    visit by Mr. Harrod, in the _Norfolk Archæology_, vol. v. p. 32.]

    [Footnote 30-2: Richard Woodville, Earl Rivers, father to the
    Queen, Lord Treasurer and Constable of England.]

    [Footnote 30-3: Anthony Woodville, Lord Scales, eldest son of the
    Earl Rivers.]

    [Footnote 30-4: A younger son of Earl Rivers.]

    [Footnote 31-1: This refers to the contract between Sir John
    Paston and Anne Hawte.--F.]

    [Footnote 31-2: Richard, Duke of Gloucester, afterwards King
    Richard III.--F.]

  [[tyll / that be passyd with yow
  _text has “he passyd”: corrected from Fenn_]]


717

ABSTRACT[33-1]

RICHARD CALLE TO SIR JOHN PASTON

[Sidenote: 1469 / JULY 3]

Has arranged with Mariot’s debtors at Bekham, and discharged him of the
debt of £16. Has thus taken an open estate in the manor, as Paston
desired. Had much trouble to bring Mariot, and especially his wife, [to
reason], but with fair words and money got her out of the house. Lord
Scales has sent to-day to Mr. Roos and others for men to come to
Middleton on Wednesday,--short warning enough; and we were in doubt
‘what purveyance ye had made at London.’ I believe my mistress and my
master your brother have sent you word of the demeaning of the King and
the Lords here.

Norwich, Monday after St. Peter’s day.

  [The reference to the King’s being in Norfolk fixes the date of this
  letter to the year 1469.]

    [Footnote 33-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]


718

JOHN AUBRY[34-1] TO SIR HENRY SPELMAN[34-2]

_To the right reverent Sir Henry Spelman, Recordor of the Cite of
Norwich, be this Letter delivered._

[Sidenote: 1469 / JULY 9]

Right reverent sir, I recomaunde me to you. Plese it you to knowe, this
same day com to me the Shirreve of Norffolk[34-3] hymself, and tolde me
that the Quene shall be at Norwich up on Tuysday[34-4] cometh sevenyght
suyrly. And I desired to have knowe of hym, by cause this shuld be hir
first comyng hedir, how we shuld be rulyd, as well in hir resseyvyng, as
in hir abidyng here. And he seide, he wold nat ocupie hym ther wyth, but
he councelid us to wryte to you to London, to knowe of hem that ben of
counsell of that cite, or wyth other wurshepfull men of the same cite,
that ben knowyng in that behalf, and we to be ruled ther aftir, as were
acordyng for us; for he lete me to wete that she woll desire to ben
resseyved and attendid as wurshepfully as evir was Quene a forn hir.
Wherefore, sir, I, be the assent of my Bretheren Aldermen, &c., prey you
hertily to have this labour for this cite. And that it plese you, if it
may be, that at that day ye be here in propre persone; and I trust in
God, that outher in rewards, or ellys in thankynges, both of the Kyngs
comyng, and in this, ye shall ben plesid as worthy is.

Wrete in hast at Norwich the vj. day of Juyll Anno ix^o Regis E. quarti.

  By your weelwyller,

  JOHN AUBRY, &c.

    [Footnote 34-1: Mayor of Norwich in 1469.]

    [Footnote 34-2: [From Fenn, ii. 18.]]

    [Footnote 34-3: Roger Ree was Sheriff of Norfolk this year.]

    [Footnote 34-4: 18th July.]

  [[Sidenote: 1469 / JULY 9
  _printed as shown, but body of letter says “vj” (6)_]]


719

EDWARD IV. TO THE DUKE OF CLARENCE, &c.[35-1]

[Sidenote: 1469 / JULY 9]

_These iij. letteres undirwreten, the Kyng of his own hand wrote unto my
Lords Clarence, Warrewyke, and Archbishop of York. The credence wherof
in substaunce was, that every of them shulde in suech pesibil wise, as
thei have be accustumed to ryde, come unto his Highness._


R. E.

_To our Brother of Clarence._

Brodir, we pray you to yeve feight [_faith_] and credence to our
welbeloved Sir Thomas Montgomery and Morice Berkly, in that on our
behalf thei shal declare to you. And we truste ye wole dispose you
accordyng to our pleser and comaundement. And ye shal be to us right
welcome. At Notyngham the ix. day of Jull.


_To our Cosyn Th’erl of Warr’._

Cosyn, we grete you well, and pray you to yeve feight and credence to
Sir Thomas Mongomery and Morice Berkley, &c. And we ne trust that ye
shulde be of any suech disposicion towards us, as the rumour here
renneth, consederyng the trust and affeccion we bere in yow. At
Notyngham the ix. day of Jull. And, cosyn, ne thynk but ye shalbe to us
welcome.


_To our Cosyn Th’archbyshop of Yorke._

Cosyn, we pray you that ye wul, accordyng to the promyse ye made us, to
come to us as sone as ye goodely may. And that [ye] yeve credence to Sir
Thomas Mongomery and Morice Berkly, in that un our behalve thei shal sey
to you; and ye shalbe to us welcome. At Notyngham the ix. day of Jul.

    [Footnote 35-1: [From Fenn, ii. 40.] The dates of Edward the
    Fourth’s privy seals show that he was at Nottingham in July 1469.
    He was not there in 1470, the year to which Fenn assigns these
    letters; and both Clarence and Warwick were then in France. It
    would appear, therefore, that these letters were written at the
    time of Robin of Redesdale’s rebellion, which the King was going
    northwards to suppress.]


720

MARGARET PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[36-1]

_To Sir John Paston, be this delivered in hast._

[Sidenote: 1469 / AUG. 31]

I grete you wele, and send you Godds blyssyng and myn, letyng you wete
that Sir John Hevenyngham was at Norwich this day, and spake with me at
my moders, but he wuld not that it shuld be understand, for my Lord hath
mad hym on of the capteynes at Caystre of the pepill that shuld kepe the
wetche abaught the place, that no mann shuld socour them, if my Lord
departed. I desired hym to favour them, if any man shuld come to them
fro me or you, and he wuld not graunte it, but he desired me to write to
you to understand if that my Lord myght be mevyd to fynde suerte to
recompense you all wrongs, and ye wuld suffre hym to entre pesibilly,
and the lawe after his entre wuld deme it you. Be ye avysed what answer
ye wuld yeve.

Item, sith that that I spake with hym, and the same day a feythfull
frende of owrs came on to me and mevyd me if that my Lord myght be
entreted to suffre endifferent men to kepe the place, and take the
profites for bothe parties till the right be determyned be the lawe; and
my Lord for his parte, and ye for your parte, to fynde sufficient suerte
that you nowther shuld vex, lette, ner trobilled the seid endifferent
men to kepe pesibiley the possession of the seid place, and to take the
profights on to the tyme to be determyned be the lawe, to his behowe
that the lawe demeth it. And the seid persones that so endifferently
kepe possession befor ther entre into the seid place, to fynde also
sufficient suerte to answer the parte that the lawe demeth it to, of the
profits duryng ther possession, and to suffre hym pessibilly to entre,
or any in his name, whan so ever thei be required be the parte to whom
the right is demyd of all thes premyses. Send werd how ye will be
demened be as good advyse as ye can gete, and make no longer delay, for
thei must neds have hasty socour that be in the place, for thei be sore
hurt, and have non help. And if thei have hasty help it shall be the
grettest wurchip that ever ye had, and if thei be not holpen it shall be
to you a gret diswurchep; and loke never to have favour of your neybors
and frends but if this spede wele; therfor pretend it in your mend, and
purvey therfor in hast. How so ever ye do, God kepe you, and send yow
the vittory of your elmyse, and geve yow and us al grace to leve in
peas. Wretyn on Sent Gyles Evyn,[37-1] at ix. of the belle at nyght.

Robyn came home yester evyn, and he brought me nowther writyng from you,
ner good answer of this mater, which grevyth me right ill that I have
sent you so many messangers, and have so febill answers ageyn.

  Be your Moder.

    [Footnote 36-1: [From Fenn, iv. 366.] This letter was written
    after the Duke of Norfolk had begun to besiege Caister, which he
    did in the year 1469.]

    [Footnote 37-1: St. Giles’ Day is the 1st September; St. Giles’
    Eve the 31st August.]


721

MARGARET PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[37-2]

[Sidenote: 1469]

I grete zow wel, and send zow Godds blyssyng and myn, letyng zow wete
that on Thurysday last was my moder and I wer with my Lord of
Norwych,[37-3] and desyerd hym that he woold no mor do in the mater
towscheyng zowr syster, tyl that ze and my brother and other that wern
executors to zowr fader mythe beyn her to geder, for they had the rule
of her as weel as I; and he sayde playnly that he had be requeryd so
oftyn for to exameyn her, that he mythe not nor woold no longar delay
yt, and schargyd me, in peyn of cursyng, that sche schuld not be
deferred, but that she xuld a per beforn hym the nexte day; and I sayd
pleynly that I woold nowder bryng her nor send her; and than he sayd
that he woold send for her hym sylfe, and schargyd that she schuld be at
her lyberte to cume wan he sent for her; and he seyd be hys trowthe that
he woold be as sory for her and [_if_] sche ded not welle, as he wold be
and sche wer ryth ner of hys kyn, bothe for my moder ys sake and myn,
and other of her frendds, for he woost welle that her demenyng had
stekyd soor at our harts.

My moder and I in formyd hym that we kowd never onderstond be her
sayyng, be no language that ever sche had to hym, that neyther of hem
wer bownd to other, but that they myth schese bothe. Than he seyd that
he woold sey to her as wele as he kowde, before that he exameynd her;
and so that was told me be dyverse persones that he ded as welle and as
pleynly as sche had be rythe ner to hym, wych wer to long to wrythe at
thys tyme: her aftyr ye xalle wete, and hoo wer laberers ther in. The
schanseler[38-1] was not so gylty her in as I wend he had ben.

On Fryday the Bysschope he sent for her be Asschefeld and other that arn
ryth sory of her demenyng. And the Bysschop seyd to her ryth pleynly,
and put her in rememberawns how she was born, wat kyn and frendds that
sche had, and xuld have mo yf sche wer rulyd and gydyd aftyr hem; and yf
she ded not, wat rebuke, and schame, and los yt xuld be to her, yf sche
wer not gydyd be them, and cause of forsakyng of her for any good, or
helpe, or kownfort that sche xuld have of hem; and seyd that he had hard
sey, that sche loved schecheon [_such one_] that her frend[es] wer not
plesyd with that sche xuld have, and therfor he had her be ryth weel
avysyd how sche ded, and seyd that he woold undyrstand the woords that
sche had seyd to hym, wheyther that mad matrimony or not. And sche
rehersyd wat sche had seyd, and seyd, yf thoo wordds mad yt not suher,
she seyd boldly that sche wold make that suerher or than sche went
thens, for sche seyd sche thowgthe in her conschens sche was bownd, wat
so ever the wordds wern. Thes leud wordds greveth me and her grandam as
myche as alle the remnawnte. And than the Bysschop and the Schawnseler
bothe seyd that ther was neyther I ner no frend of hers wold reseyve
[her].

And than Calle was exameynd aparte be hym sylfe, that her wordds and hys
acordyd, and the tyme, and wher yt xuld a be don. And than the Bysschop
sayd that he supposyd that ther xuld be fownd other thynggs ageyns hym
that mythe cause the lettyng ther of; and ther for he say he wold not be
to hasty to geve sentens ther upon, and sayd that he wold geve overe day
tyl the Wednsday or Thursday aftyr Mykylmes, and so yt tys delayyd. They
woold an had her wyl performyd in haste, but the Bysschope seyd he woold
non other wyse than he had seyd.

I was with my moder at her plase whan sche was exameynd, and wan I hard
sey what her demenyng was, I schargyd my servaunts that sche xuld not be
reseyved in my hows. I had zeve hir warnyng, sche mythe a be war a for,
yf sche had a be grasyows; and I sent to on or ij. mor that they xuld
not reseyve her yf sche cam; sche was browthe a geyn to my place for to
a be reseyved, and Sir Jamys[39-1] tolde them that browthe her that I
had schargyd hem alle and sche xuld not be reseyved; and soo my Lord of
Norwych hath set her at Roger Bests, to be ther tyle the day befor sayd,
God knowyth fule evel ageyn hys wyle and hys wyvys, yf they durst do
other wyse. I am sory that they arn a cumyrd with her, but zet I am
better payed that sche isther for the whyle, that sche had ben in other
place be cause of the sadnes and good dysposysion of hys sylfe and hys
wyfe, for sche xal not be sou’d [_suffered ?_] ther to pleye the
brethele.[39-2] I pray zow and requer zow that ye take yt not pensyly,
for I wot wele yt gothe ryth ner zowr hart, and so doth yt to myn and to
other; but remembyr zow, and so do I, that we have lost of her but a
brethele,[39-2] and set yt the les to hart, for and sche had be good,
wherso ever sche had be, yt xuld not aben as it is, for and he wer ded
at thys owyr, she xuld never be at myn hart as sche was. As for the
devors [_divorce_] that ze write to me of, I supose wat ze ment, but I
scharge zow upon my blyssyng that ze do not, ner cause non other to do,
that xuld offend God and zour conschens, for and ze do, or cause for to
be do, God wul take vengawns ther upon, [and] ye xuld put zour sylfe and
other in gret joparte; for wettyt wele, sche xal ful sor repent her
leudnes her aftyr, and I pray God sche mute soo. I pray zow for myn hard
ys hese [_heart’s ease_], be ze of a good cownfort in alle thynggs;
I trust God xal helpe ryth wele, and I pray God so do in alle our
maters. I wuld ze toke hed yf ther weher any labor mad in the kort of
Cawntrybery for the leud mater forsayd.

But yf [_i.e._ unless] the Duke[40-1] be purveyd for, he and hys wyse
kow[n]sel xalle lefe thys cuntre; yt is told me that he seythe that he
wul not spar to do that he is purposyd, for no Duke in Ynglond. God
helpe at nede.

    [Footnote 37-2: [From Fenn, iv. 358.] This letter has reference to
    the contract of marriage between Richard Calle and Margery Paston
    in 1469. _See_ No. 710, preceding. The last paragraph seems to
    have reference to the propositions mentioned in the preceding
    letter.]

    [Footnote 37-3: Walter Lyhert.]

    [Footnote 38-1: Fenn thinks this was Dr. John Saresson, otherwise
    Wigenhale, who, he tells us, was Chancellor to the Bishop from
    1435 to 1471, and had other Church preferment in the Diocese. But
    I am a little doubtful whether he lived so long, as it does not
    appear that he kept any other of his preferments to so late a
    date. We know that Dr. William Pykenham was Chancellor in 1471.]

    [Footnote 39-1: Sir James Gloys.]

    [Footnote 39-2: _Brethele_ or _brethelyng_ signified a worthless
    person.]

    [Footnote 40-1: The Duke of Norfolk.]


722

SIR JOHN PASTON TO MASTER WRITTILL[40-2]

_To Mastyr Wryttyll._

[Sidenote: 1469 / [SEPT.]]

Master Wrytyll, I recomande me to yow, besechyng yow hertely, as myn
holl trust is in yow, that ye doo yowr devoyr to contynew trews tyll
Fryday or Saturday in the mornyng, by whych tyme I hope the massanger
shall come, and that ye be not dryven to take an appoyntment if ye kan
undrestand by any lyklyed that itt be able to be abydyn and recystyd,
and that ye fele my brotherys dysposycion therin, as my trust is in yow,
prayng yow to remembre that it restythe, as God helpe me, on all my
well. For as God helpe me, I hadd levyr the place wer brennyd, my
brother and servants savyd, than the best appoyntment that evyr ye and I
comonyd of scholde be my goode wyll be takyn, if this massage from the
Kynge may reskwe it. And if it be so, that my Lorde be remevyd by the
Kynges comandement, whyche restythe with hys honour, I may in tyme to
kome do hym servyse, as schall recompence any grodge or dysplesur that
he evyr had, or hathe to me or myn; and ye, if it the rather by your
wysdam and polesye the moene above wryten may be hadd, schall be as sewr
of the servyce of my trewe brother and servantys, and me, as ye kan
devyse by my trowthe; for in goode feythe thys mater stykyth mor nyghe
myn hart and me than I kan wryght on to yow, and to my brother and
servaunts mor ner than as God knowyth they wot off. Wherfor, Master
Wryttyll, all owre welfare restyth in yow, besechyng yow to remembre it.
For thys mater is to all usse eyther makyng or marryng.

Item, asfor Arblaster or Lovell, I kan not thynke that they or any of
them may be with yow. Wherfor in yow is all, and God have yow in kepyng.

Wretyn at London, the day next affor yowr departyng. I schall sende yow
mor knowleche to morrow, with Godds grace.

  Yowrs,

  JOHN PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 40-2: [From Fenn, iv. 370.] Master Writtill, to whom
    this and the next letter are addressed, is mentioned later as a
    servant of the Duke of Clarence, by whose means Sir John was
    endeavouring to arrange a suspension of hostilities with the Duke
    of Norfolk, who was now besieging Caister.]


723

SIR JOHN PASTON TO MASTER WRITTILL[41-1]

[Sidenote: 1469 / SEPT. 10]

Ryght wershypfull syr, I recomaund me to you, thankyng you of your grete
labour whych I have nozt as yet, but I shall deserve to my power; and
ferthermore lyke yow to wyte that I have thoght ryght long after you;
nevyrthelesse I remember well that ye delt wythe ryght delayous peple.
My Lord Archbyshop and other of my Lords, and I, dempte by cawse of your
long tarryng, that by youre sad dyscrescyon all hadde ben sett thorow.
Neverthelesse I understend by your wrytyng that my Lord of Norffolks
concell thynketh that hys entent, whych ye sertefyed me by your wrytyng,
sholde be more to hys wyrshep than the appoyntements and rewll made by
the Lords of the Kyngs concell whych be to my seyd Lord of Norffolk ner
kyne [_near kin_]; whych appoyntements sythen yourr departyng hath be
largely remembryd amongs the seyd Lords here, thynkyng it in hem self so
honorabyll to my Lord of Norffolk, that ther shuld non of my Lords
concell well avysed mevyd to the contrary.

Jamys Hobard[42-1] was sent fro my [Lord] of Norffolk heder, and spake
with my Lord Archbyshop,[42-2] and answer he had of my seyd Lord; and
howe my Lord tendryd the mater yet and wyll I trowe he have told you,
and yf he have not, the brynger her of schall informe you; and he broght
thys same appoyntement from my Lord, that my Lord was well agryed that I
shulde ocupye. For my parte, iff I shud take no other apoyntement but
acordyng to your letter, it wer hard for me and for my tytell to putte
my Lord in that possessyon; for ther ys thyngs in erthe [_uneath_,
_i.e._ scarcely] to myn esse in your letter, gode for me in that
appoyntement, savyng the suerty of my brothers lyffe and my servants,
whych ye thynke dowtefull yf so be that thay lakke stuff, shotte, and
vytayll; mervaylyng sore, and thynk it impossybell in thys shorte
season, or in iiij. tyme the season heder towards, that thay shuld lakk
other [_either_], with owte it soo be that my Lords men have enterd
owght the place, and so had ther stuffe from hem, whych I cannot thynk.
Also, sir, for [_fore_] the tyme of your comyng to my Lord of Norffolk,
servaunts of [my Lords wer with][42-3] my moder at Norwych, mevyng to
send to my brother hyr sone, to delyver the place under such a forme as
youre lettere specefyeth, and so I cannot understand what regard my
Lords concell takyth to my Lords letter, and to your labour in thys
behalf, but that they offeryd as largely afore. Ze wryteth in your
letter that ye durst not passe your credens; please you to remember that
seyd your credens affore the Lords was ryght large, and as large as
myght well be in thys mater, both to my Lords concell of Norffolk to
withdrawe the seege, with moor other mater as ye knowe; and to the
Justice of the Peas and to the Shyryff and hys offycers, your awtoryte
was grete inow to iche of them.

Wherfor, Mayster Wretell, I never for this, nere zet wyll, take
appoyntement in thys mater, but as my Lords wyll and my Lord Archbyshop,
whych, as well as I my self, have holy putte our tryst to youre dyscrete
dyreccyon; and my seyd Lord sythen youre departer, zour zoyng,[43-1]
thynkyng you alls mete a man in executyng ther comaundement as cowde be
chosyn. Neverthelesse for awnswer to you at thys season, my Lord
Archbyshop ys north wards towards the Kyng; how be it, it ys seyd, uppon
a metyng with my Lord of Clarens, my Lord shuld retourne a yen; and as
zester evyn he send a servaunt of hys to me, wenyng to hys Lordship that
Sir Humfray[43-2] and ye wer in Caster as was appoynted, and ye shuld
send to hys Lordshyp answer of the gydyng ther by wrytyng, comaundyng me
that yff any such wrytyngs cam from you, yf hys Lordshyp wer not past
xx. myle fr[om Lond]on,[43-3] to com to hys Lordshyp with the same.
Understandyng for sertayn that he ys nott yet so ferr, wherfor I will in
althe hast possybell ryde nygt and day till I see hys Lordshyp, and
after comunicacyon had with hys Lordshyp, as sone as ys possybell that a
man may go be twext, ye shall have an answer of hys dysposicyon; for hys
intres is such that, as I have wryten, I shall never do therin withoute
hym, as my cosyn, brynger herof, more playnly shall enforme you; for I
canne thynke ryght well, that as ze wryteth to me, my broder wyll not
delyver the place to non erthly person, but yf he see wrytyng fro my
Lord.

It semyt be yowr wrytyng that my Lord of Norffolk conseyll intende not
that my Lord Archbyshop shuld dele in thys mater, for he ys not named in
your letter, wherof I mervayle; for it was movyd to you at your
departyng hens, the Kyngs concell shuld have take dyreccyon in thys
mater, or els my Lord Cardenall,[44-1] my Lord of Clarens, my Lord
Archbyshop, and my Lord of Essex,[44-2] &c. Neverthelesse, Mayster
Wryttyll, all profytht, maner, or lyflod, leyd apart, if it be so that
thorow reklesnese my brother and servaunts be in such joperte as ye have
wryten to me (whych shold be half impossybell in my mynd that thay shold
myssuse so mech stuff in iiij. tymes the space), and that ye have
evident knowlych by my seyd brother hym self therof, I woll praye yow to
se hym and them in suerte of ther lyffys, what so ever shold fall of the
lyfflode; how be it I wold not that my brother and servaunts shold gyff
upp the place not for a m^l_li._, yf thay myght in any wyse kepe it and
save ther lyves. And therfor, at the reverens of God, sycht it ys so,
that my Lord Archbyshop and my Lords all, and I, have putte our trust in
you, that ye wyll do your devoyer to have the verrey knowlech of my
brother hymself, and not of my Lords men, wheder he stante in such
jopertye as your letter specefyeth or net, for I dowte not uppon the
syzth of thys letter, and of the letter that ye had before, that my
brother will put no mystrust in you, consyderyng that he knowyth that ye
com from my Lords, and my Lord Archbyshop, and have my wrytyng; and as
for my Lord Archbyshop wrytyng and aunswere, such as it shalbe, ye shall
have it in all the haste possybell. But I thynke veryly that my Lord
eschewyth to telle you any thyng without that he myght speke with you
allone, and me thynketh veryly that thay ought not to lette [_hinder_]
you to speke with hym allone, consyderyng that ye have auctoryte and
wrytyng from the Lords so to do. And as for the justificacyon of entryng
the place, and sege layng to [the same][44-3] and the comaundement of
the Justice of the Pease and the Sherewe to assyste my Lord in thys
gydyng, I wote ye understond that the Lords knowe all that mater, and ye
herd it comened, and how thay toke it in ther consayts.

Ther ys no more, Mayster Wryttell, but I commyth all thys wrytyng unto
your dyscrescyon; and as ye thynk best acordyng to such menys desyre as
have entretyd you therin, and for my moyst avayle, I pray you, sir, soo
doo, and I shall se un to your besynes and labour, that ye shall have
cause to do for me in tyme comyng, and as the brynger herof shall tell
you. And I pray God have you in Hys kepyng.

Wryten at London, the x. day of Septembr.

  By your frend for ever,

  JOHN PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 41-1: [From Fenn, iv. 372.] See preliminary note to last
    letter. We have adopted a different punctuation from that of Fenn
    in some parts of this letter.]

    [Footnote 42-1: This most probably was James Hobart, who, in 1478,
    was Lent-Reader at Lincoln’s Inn, and in 1487
    Attorney-General.--F.]

    [Footnote 42-2: George Neville, Archbishop of York.]

    [Footnote 42-3: The original MS. was indistinct in these places.]

    [Footnote 43-1: The words ‘zour zoyng’ (your going) seem to be
    redundant.]

    [Footnote 43-2: Sir Humphrey Talbot was a Captain at this siege,
    under the Duke of Norfolk.--F.]

    [Footnote 43-3: The original MS. was indistinct in these places.]

    [Footnote 44-1: Thomas Bourchier, Archbishop of Canterbury, and
    Lord Cardinal.]

    [Footnote 44-2: Henry Bourchier, Earl of Essex.]

    [Footnote 44-3: Here the original MS. was indistinct.]


724

MARGARET PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[45-1]

[Sidenote: 1469 / SEPT. 12]

I grete you wele, letyng you wete that your brother and his felesshep
stand in grete joperte at Cayster, and lakke vetayll; and Dawbeney[45-2]
and Berney[45-3] be dedde, and diverse other gretly hurt; and they fayll
gunnepowder and arrowes, and the place sore brokyn with gonnes of the
toder parte, so that, but thei have hasty help, thei be like to lese
bothe ther lyfes and the place, to the grettest rebuke to you that ever
came to any jentilman, for every man in this countre marvaylleth gretly
that ye suffre them to be so longe in so gret joperte with ought help or
other remedy.

The Duke hathe be more fervently set therup on, and more cruell, sith
that Wretyll, my Lord of Claraunce man, was ther, than he was befor, and
he hath sent for all his tenaunts from every place, and other, to be
ther at Cayster at Thorysday next comyng, that ther is than like to be
the grettest multitude of pepill that came ther yet. And thei purpose
them to make a gret assaught--for thei have sent for gannes [_guns_] to
Lynne and other place be the seeys syde--that, with ther gret multitude
of gannes, with other shoot and ordynaunce, ther shall no man dar appere
in the place. Thei shall hold them so besy with ther gret pepill, that
it shall not lye in their pore within to hold it ageyn them with ought
God help them, or have hasty socour from you.

Therfor, as ye wull have my blyssyng, I charge you and require you that
ye se your brother be holpyn in hast. And if ye can have nonmeane,
rather desire writyng fro my Lord of Clarens, if he be at London, or
ell[es] of my Lord Archebusshop of York, to the Duke of Norffolk, that
he wull graunte them that be in the place her lyfes and ther goodes; and
in eschewyng of insurreccions with other in convenyens that be like to
growe within the shire of Norffolk, this trobelows werd [_world_], be
cause of such conventicles and gaderyngs within the seid shire for cause
of the seid place, thei shall suffre hym to entre up on such
appoyntment, or other like takyn be the advyse of your councell ther at
London, if ye thynk this be not good, till the law hath determyned
otherwyse; and lete hym write a nother letter to your brother to deliver
the place up on the same appoyntment. And if ye think, as I can suppose,
that the Duke of Norffolk wull not aggre to this, be cause he graunted
this aforn, and thei in the place wuld not accept it, than I wuld the
seid massanger shuld with the seid letters bryng fro the seid Lord of
Clarence, or ell[es] my Lord Archebusshop, to my Lord of Oxenford, other
letters to rescue them forth with, thowghe the seid Erle of Oxenford
shuld have the place duryng his lyfe for his labour. Spare not this to
be don in hast, if ye wull have ther lyves, and be sett by in Norffolk,
though ye shuld leys the best maner of all for the rescuse. I had lever
ye last the lyffelode than ther lyfes. Ye must gete a massanger of the
Lords or sume other notabill man to bryng ther letters.

Do your devoir now, and lete me send you no mor massangers for this
maters; but send me be the berer her of more certeyn comfort than ye
have do be all other that I have sent be for. In any wyse, lete the
letters that shall come to the Erle of Oxenford comyn with the letters
that shall comyn to the Duke of Norffolk, that if he wull not aggree to
the ton, that ye may have redy your rescuse that it nede no mor to send
therfor. God kepe you.

Wretyn the Tuesday next befor Holy Rood Day, in hast.

  Be your Moder.

    [Footnote 45-1: [From Fenn, iv. 382.] This and the other letters
    relating to the siege of Caister are all rendered certain in point
    of date by the documents touching its surrender on the 26th
    September.]

    [Footnote 45-2: John Dawbeney, Esq.]

    [Footnote 45-3: Osbert Berney, the other person here mentioned as
    dead, was not killed at the siege. He survived, and died without
    issue some years after, when he was buried in Bradeston Church in
    Norfolk, there being a brass plate in the chancel having the
    following inscription to his memory:--‘_Hic jacet Osbertus filius
    Joh. Berney, Armig. de Redeham Dni. et de Brayston._’ He was the
    son of John Berney, Esq., by Catherine, daughter of Osbert
    Mundeford of Hockwell, Esq.--F.]


725

SIR JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[47-1]

[Sidenote: 1469 / SEPT. 15]

Moodr, uppon Saterday last was, Dawbeney and Bernay wer on lyve and
mery, and I suppose ther com no man owt of the place to yow syn that
tyme that cowde have asserteynyd to yow of ther dethys. And as towchyng
the fyrsenesse of the Duke or of hys peple schewyd syn that tyme that
Wryttel departyd, I trowe it was concludyd that trews and abstynence of
werre scholde be hadd er he departyd, whych shalle dewr tyl Monday next
comyng; and by that tyme I trow that trews shall be takyn tyll that day
vij. nyght aftr, by whych tyme I hope of a goode dyreccion schall be
hadde.

And wher as ye wryght to me that I scholde sewe for letteris from my
Lordys of Clarans and Yorke, they be not her, and if they wrot to hym as
they have don ij. tymes, I trow it wolde nat advayle; and as for to
labor thois letteris and the rescu to gedre, they ben ij. sendry
thyngys, for when the rescu is redy, that the cost ther of is don. For
if I be drevyn therto to rescu it er they com ther that scholde do it,
it shall cost a m^{l}. escuys, and as meche after, whyh wey wer harde
for me to take, whyll that I maye do it otherwise; but as to sey that
they schall be rescuyd if all the lands that I have in Ingelond and
frendys maye do it, they shall, and God be frendly, and that as schertly
as it may goodlely and wele be brout abut. And the grettest defawt
erthly is mony and som frendys and neyborys to helpe; wherfor I beseche
yow to sende me comfort with what money ye coude fynde the menys to get
or chevysche uppon suerte sufficient, er uppon lyflod to be inmorgage er
yit solde, and what peple by lyklyed yowr frendys and myn kowde make
uppon a schort warnyng, and to send me worde in all the hast as it is
needfull. But, moodre, I fele by yowr wryghtyng that ye deme in me I
scholde not do my devyr withowt ye wrot to me som hevye tydyngs; and,
modre, if I had nede to be qwykynyd with a letter in thys nede, I wer of
my selfe to slawe [_too slow_] a felaw; but, moodre, I ensur yow that I
have herde x. tymes werse tydyngs syn the assege by gan than any letter
that ye wrot to me, and somtyme I have herde ryght goode tydyngs both.
But thys I ensure yow that they that be within have no werse reste than
I have, ner castyth mor jupperte; but whethyr I had goode tydyngys er
ill, I take Gode to wittnesse that I have don my devoyr as I wolde be
don for in case lyke, and schall doo tyll ther be an ende of it.

I have sent to the Kynge to Yorke, and to the Lordys, and hope to have
ansswer from them by Wednysday at the ferthest, and after that answer
shall I be rewlyd, and than send yow word, for tyll that tyme kan I take
non dyreccion. And to encomfort yow, dy[s]peyre yow not for lak of
vytayle ner of gonne powder, ner be natt to hevy ner to mery therfor;
for and hevynesse or sorow wolde have be the remedy ther of, I knew
nevyr mater in my lyfe that I kowde have ben so hevy or sory for, and
with Goddys grace it schall be remedyed well inow; for by my trowthe I
hadde lever lose the maner of Caister than the symplest mannys lyfe
therin, if that may be hys saveacion. Wherfor I beseche yow to sende me
worde wat mony and men ye thynke that I am lyke to get in that contre;
for the hasty purchace of mony and men schall be the getyng and rescu of
it, and the sauevacion of most mennys lyfys, if we take that weye.

Also thys daye I porpose to sende to Yorke to the Kyng for a thyng,
whych same only maye by lyklyod be the savacion of all. Ye must remembre
that the rescue of it is the last remedy of all, and how it is nat easy
to get; and also ye sende me worde that I scholde nat kome hom withowt
that I kome stronke. But if I had hadd on other stronge place in
Norfolke to have comen to, thowe I have browt ryght fewe with me,
I scholde, with Godds grace, have rescued it by thys tyme, er ellys he
scholde have ben fayne to have besegyd bothe placys or yit, and the Duke
had not kept Yarmoth owthe. But, mother, I beseche yow sende me som
mony, for by my trowth I have but x_s._ I[49-1] wot not wher to have
mor, and moreovyr I have ben x. tymes in lyke case or werse within thys
x. wekys. I sent to Rychard Call for mony, but he sendyth me non.

I beseche yow to gyde the evydence that Pekok can tell yow of, and to se
it saffe; for it is tolde me that Richard Call hath hadd right large
langage of them. I wolde nat they com in hys fyngrys. I have no worde
from yow of them, ner whether ye have yit in yowr kepyng the evydence of
Est Bekham owt of hys handys, ner whethyr ye have sent to my manerys
that they schold not paye hym no mor mony or not. Also that it like yow
to geve credence to Robyn in other thyngs.

Wret the Fryday next after Holy Roode Day.

  JOHN PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 47-1: [From Fenn, iv. 386.] This letter was clearly
    written in reply to the last.]

    [Footnote 49-1: _I._ The right-hand copy in modern spelling reads
    ‘and.’]


726

WRITTILL TO THE BESIEGERS OF CAISTER[50-1]

_Sir John Hevyngham,[50-2] Th. Wyngfeld,[50-3] Gilbert Debenham,[50-4]
Wil. Brandon,[50-5] and to everych of them severally in otheris
absence._

[Sidenote: 1469 / [SEPT.]]

Hit is so that accordyng to such direccion as was mevid to be desird of
my Lords beyng heer, as for such as heere bee they marveil gretly
therof, thynkyng and remembring in themself that such offre as was made
by my credence to my Lorde,[50-6] and to fore you reported, shuld have
sownyd more to his pleasure and honour than this his desire.
Nevirthelesse my Lords thenke where as they wrote and desirid joyntly
that such credence as ye remembre myght be observyd and taken, and by
you refusid, nowe yif they shuld assent to the desire of this direccion,
hit is thought in them not so to doo; for it is so fortuned that dyvers
of my Lords, from whome I brought both wrytyng and credence, be at the
Kyngs high commaundement hastely departed unto his Highnesse, trustyng
in God to have heeryng in brief tyme of their hasty ayen comyng, atte
which tyme my Lords that heere be, and they that shal come ayen, shal
comon and speke to gyder of this desire and direccion, and such answere
as they geve and make shall be sent unto you than with haste possible.
Ovir this, me thenkith for your excuse of burden and charge such as I
hier will be leid unto you concernyng the grete werks that dailly be and
ar at the maner of Castre, yif ye thenk that God shuld have pleasir, and
also the Kyng oure sovereign Lorde, and that my seide Lords shuld thenk
in you gode avise or sad, and that ye entendid to avoide the sheddyng of
Cristyn blode and the destruccion of the Kyngs liege people, that at
your politik labour and wisedome ye myght bryng my Lord to th’abstynence
of warre, and a trieux to be had and contynued unto tyme of the retourn
of my seid Lords, or els knowlege of their entent; certifieng you for
trouth that ther be messengers sent unto my seid Lords with lettrez of
such answere as I had of you to your desire to gyder, knowyng certeinly
that ther shal be hasty relacion of ther entents in the premisis, which
answers ye shall have atte ferthist by Monday cometh sevenyght.
Ferthirmore lettyng you wit that I understond for certein that my Lords
that be heere eschewe, for such inconveniense that myght fall, to
conclude any answere by them self, consideryng that my credence was
geven by all the Lords; prayng you, as shal be doon to the continuaunce
of this trieux aforesaid, that I may be acerteyned, or yif at this houre
ye coude yit thenk my credence resonable and honourable to be accepted
and taken, sendith me woorde in wrytyng from you by my servant, brynger
of this, al delaies leid aparte. For I acertein you, as he that owe you
service, I was and yit am gretly blamed for my long tarying with you,
for, dyvers of my Lords taried heere for me, by th’assent of al my
Lords, lenger than they wold have don, to know myn answere and guydyng
from you.

And ovir this I certyfie you that ye cannot make my Lords heere to thenk
that yif ther be inconvenient or myshief, murdre, or manslauter had or
done, but and your wills and entents were to the contrarye, my Lord is
notid so well disposid that, with oute your grete abettement, he neither
will doo nor assent to non such thyng; prayng you therfor, as your
frende, to remembre wele your self, and so to rule you, as my Lords may
have in tyme to come knowlege of your more sadd disposicion than as yit
I feele they thenk in you. And how that my Lords note sum of you, James
Hobert, beyng of my Lords counsel, can enforme you; wherefor for Godds
sake remembr you, and delyver my servant, and yif ye thenk my first
credence or this advertisement shal be taken to effect, than I pray you
that my servaunt, brynger hereof, may have sure condyte to speke with
John Paston, and to report to hym these direccions, and upon that to
delyver hym a bill certifyng the same.

    [Footnote 50-1: [From Fenn, iv. 404.] This letter is anonymous,
    but was evidently written by Writtill during his negotiations for
    a suspension of hostilities.]

    [Footnote 50-2: Sir John Heveningham, Knight and Banneret, was a
    descendant of an ancient family situated at the town of
    Heveningham, in Suffolk. His son Thomas became owner of the estate
    at Ketteringham, in Norfolk, where this family continued for
    several generations.--F.]

    [Footnote 50-3: Sir Thomas Wingfield was a younger son either of
    Sir Robert or Sir John Wingfield of Letheringham, in Suffolk.--F.]

    [Footnote 50-4: Sir Gilbert Debenham, Knight, was descended of an
    ancient and knightly family in the county of Suffolk.--F.]

    [Footnote 50-5: Sir William Brandon married Elizabeth, daughter of
    Sir Robert Wingfield, and was ancestor to Charles Brandon,
    afterwards Duke of Suffolk.--F.]

    [Footnote 50-6: The Duke of Norfolk.]


727

WRITTILL TO THOMAS WINGFIELD[52-1]

[Sidenote: 1469]

Mr. Wyngfeld, I recomande me to you. Please you to wit I have sent a
lettre joyntly to you and to al my Lordes[52-2] counsel; nevirtheles,
for the special favor and service that I bere and owe to you, I write to
you aparte, praying you to put your hasty devoir to the delyverans of my
servaunt, with th’answere of the same; and ovir that for Goddis sake
remember you hou that ye stond my Lordes nygh kynnesman, and by whom my
Lordes wulle gretly be steerid, that ye eschewe and avoide to be non of
those that my Lordes here thenk shuld set or cause my Lord to do thynges
otherwise than accordith to the pleasir of my Lordes; for it is so that
there be dyvers of my Lordes counsel stond in hevy report of my Lordes,
of which I wold ye were non; certifieng you that I know so ferre that
yif ye any thyng doo in this mater to the pleasir of my Lordes, it will
neither be unremembrid ne unrecompensid, not doutyng but that hereafter
to have a large thonk of you for this my counsel; praying you ferthermor
to move Sir John Hevyngham, and such as ye knowe wele disposid, to
assist you in this; and that this bille be kept secrete, as my trust is
in you. Wreten at London.

    [Footnote 52-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This and the letter
    following are corrected drafts upon the same paper, and both
    evidently written at the same time, and by the same writer, as the
    last letter.]

    [Footnote 52-2: The Duke of Norfolk’s.]


728

WRITTILL TO JOHN PASTON[53-1]

[Sidenote: 1469]

Mr. Paston, it is so that sith tyme I spake with you I sent you a bill
which concludith an abstinence of werre to be had unto Fryday last was,
trustyng in that season that by the menes of my Lordes heere a
conclusion shal be taken; lettyng you wit that before my comyng hider
certein of my Lordes were departid hens towards the Kyng northwards. And
for asmich as I cannot in this season have no hasty answere of such
lettrez as were sent unto them concernyng this mater, I have wretyn by
the meanes of my Lordes heere I have wretyn a lettre to my Lordes
counsell a lettre,[53-2] and amonges other thynges movid them in the
seid lettre to advertise my Lord for abstynence of werre til Monday come
sevenyght; and yif my Lordes and his counsell so agree, I have comaundid
my servaunt, brynger hereof, to geve you knowlege of the same, avisyng
you that contenuyng the seid seson to absteyne you from werre gevyng
outward in like wise; and by that season I hope to have knowlege of my
Lordes ententes.

    [Footnote 53-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] _See_ preliminary note to
    last letter.]

    [Footnote 53-2: So in the MS., the redundant words being left
    uncancelled.]


729

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[53-3]

_To John Paston, and to non othyr._

[Sidenote: 1469 / SEPT. 18]

I recomand me to yow, and promyse yow that I have and schall labore and
fynde the meane that ye schall have honor of yowr delyng as ye have
hyddr towards, as all Ingelond and every man reportythe; and moreover I
am in weye for it by many dyverse weys, wherof ther schall be one
exicutyd by thys day xiiij. nyght at the ferthest, and peraventur within
vij. dayes. And iff ye maye kepe it so longe, I wold be gladde, and aftr
that iff ye have nott from me other wryghtyng, that than ye do ther in
for yowr saffgarde and yowr felaschep only, and to yowr worschypys; and
as for the place, no force therfor. Ye knowe thys hande, therfor nedythe
no mencion from whem it comythe; and more ovyr, they that be abut yow be
in obloquy of all men, and mor ovyr they have ben wretyn to by alse
speciall wryghtyng as myght be, after the worlde that now is, and
promyse yow that the Dukes concell wolde that they had nevyr be gon it;
and more ovyr they be chargyd in payne of ther lyvys, that thow they
gate the place, they scholde not hurt on of yow. Ther is nowther ye ner
none with yow, but and he knewe what is generally reportyd of hym, he or
ye, and God fortewne yow wele, may thynke hym iiij. tymes better in
reputacion of all folk than evyr he was. Be war whom ye make a concell
to thys mater.

Also I lete yow wete that I am in moche mor comfort of yow than I maye
wryght, and they that be about yow have cawse to be mor ferde than ye
have; and also bewar of spendyng of yowr stuffe of qwarellys, powdr, and
stone, so that if they assaut yow er we come, that ye have stuffe to
dyffende yow of over, and than of my lyfe ye get no mor, and that your
felaschyp be evyr ocopyed in renewyng of your stuffe.

Wretyn the Mondaye next aftr Holy Roode Daye.

   *   *   *

I trow, thow ye be not prevy ther to, ther is taken a trews new tyl thys
day vij. nygh.

    [Footnote 53-3: [From Fenn, iv. 394.] _See_ preliminary note to
    No. 724.]


730

PASSPORT TO THE BESIEGED ON SURRENDER OF CAISTER[55-1]

_The Duc of Norffolk._

[Sidenote: 1469 / SEPT. 26]

Where John Paston, esquier, and other divers persones have, ageyn the
peas, kepte the manoir of Caster with force, ageyne the wille and entent
of us the Duc of Norffolk, to oure grete displeaser; whiche
notwithstanding, at the contemplacion of the writing of the moost
worshipfull and reverent Fader in God the Cardenall of England, and our
moost trusty and entierly beloved Unkel the Archbisshop of Canterbury,
the right noble Prince my Lord of Clarence, and other Lords of oure
blood, and also at the grete labour and enstaunce of our moost dere and
singler belovid wiffe, we be agreed that the seid John Paston and his
seid fellaship, beyng in the seid maneur, shall depart and goo out of
the seid maneur without delay, and make therof deliveraunce to suche
persones as we will assigne, the seid fellaship havyng their lyves and
goods, horsse, and harneys, and other goods beyng in the kepyng of the
seid John Paston; except gonnes, crossebows, and quarells, and alle
other hostelments, to the seid maneur annexed and belonginge. And to
have xv. dayes respyte aftir their seid departing out, to goo in to what
place shall like theim, without any accions or quarell to be taken or
made by us, in our name to theim, or any of theim, within our fraunchise
or without, duryng the seid tyme.

Yoven under our signet at Yermouth the xxvj. day of Septembr the ix^te
yere of King Edward the iiij^th.

  NORFF’. [LS]

    [Footnote 55-1: [From Fenn, ii. 24.]]

  [[_in the printed book, the letters “LS” (Locus Sigilli?) are shown
  in a circle after the signature_]]


731

JOHN PASTON AND THE SURRENDER OF CAISTER[56-1]

_The Duc of Norff’._

[Sidenote: 1469 / SEPT. 26]

John, Duke of Norffolk, Erle Marshall of Sussex, Surrey, and of
Nottingham, Marshall of Inglonde, Lorde Mowbray of Segreve, Bromfelde,
and Yalle, to al our frendes, servauntes, and othir Crystyne people,
gretyng. Wher John Paston, esquier, and othre diverse persones forseble
hath kepte the manoir of Castre, contrary to our will and pleaser, and
aftirwarde by his lowly labour and gret meanese to us maade, the seide
John Paston hathe maade deliveraunce of the seide manoir to such persons
as we have assignede, and he and his seide felouship by our lycence to
departe out of the same. Wherefore we pray, wil, and charge you and
everysche of you, that ye ne vexce, trouble, manase, ne greve the
forseid persones, nor eny of them, for the kepyng of the seide manere
contrary to the Kynge our Sovereynge Lordes lawyes, for we have takyne
them in our safe garde. Yevin undir our signet and signmanuell the
xxvj^ti day of Septembre, the ix^th yere of Kynge Edward iiij^t.

  NORFF’. [LS]

    [Footnote 56-1: [From a MS. in the College of Arms.] The original
    of this document, signed and sealed by the Duke of Norfolk, is
    inserted in the MS. volume called Brooke’s _Aspilogia_, vol. i. p.
    35.]

  [[_in the printed book, the letters “LS” (Locus Sigilli?) are shown
  in a circle after the signature_]]


732

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[56-2]

Caystr yelded.--J. P.

[Sidenote: 1469 / [SEPT.]]

Ryght werchepfull sir, I recomand me on to yow. And as for the serteynte
of the delyverance of Caster, John Chapman can tell yow how that we wer
enforsyd therto, as wel as mysylf. As for John Chapman and his iij.
felaws, I have purveyd that they be payid ache of them xl_s._, with the
mony that they had of yow and Dawbeney; and that is inow for the seson
that they have don yow servys. I pray yow geve them ther thank, for by
my trowthe they have as well deservyd it as eny men that ever bare lyve;
but as for mony, ye ned not to geve hem with owt ye wyll, for they be
plesyd with ther wagys. Wryttyll promysyd me to send yow the serteynte
of the apoyntement. We wer sor[57-1] lak of vetayl, gonepowdyr, menys
herts, lak of suerte of rescwe, drevyn therto to take apoyntement.

If ye wyll that I come to yow, send me woord, and I shall pervey me for
to tery with yow a ij. or iij. dayis. By my trowthe, the rewardyng of
syche folkys as hathe ben with me dwryng the sege hathe putt me in gret
danger for the monye. God preserve yow, and I pray yow be of good cher
tyll I spek with yow, and I trust to God to ese your hert in some
thynggys.

  J. PASTON.

    [Footnote 56-2: [From Fenn, iv. 410.]]

    [Footnote 57-1: _sor._ So the word stands in Fenn, and ‘sore’ in
    the copy in modern spelling; but I suspect a misreading of ‘for.’]


733

MARGARET PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[57-2]

_To Sir John Paston, in hast. A matre._

[Sidenote: 1469 / SEPT. 23-30.]

I grete zow wele, and send zow Godds blyssyng and myn, letyng zow wete
that me thynke be the letter that ze sent me be Robeyn, that ze thynke
that I xuld wryte to zow fabyls and ymagynacyons; but I do not soo.
I have wrytyn as yt have be enformed me, and wulle do. It was told me
that bothe Daubeney and Berney wer dedee, but for serten Daubeney is
dede, God asoyle hys sowle; wher of I am rythe sery, and yt had plesyd
God that yt mythe abe other wysse.

Remembyr zow, ze have had ij. gret lossys withyne thys towylemonth, of
hym and of Sir Thomas.[57-3] God wysyth [_visiteth_] zow as yt plesythe
Hym in sundery wyses; He woole ze xuld know Hym, and serve Hym better
than ze have do be for thys tyme, and than He wull send zow the mor
grace to do wele in ale other thynggs. And for Godds love, remembyr yt
rythe welle, and take yt pacyentely, and thanke God of Hys vysitacyon;
and yf ony thyng have be a mysse ony other wyse than yt howte to have
ben befor thys, owther in pryde or in laves expences, or in eny other
thyng that have offendyd God, amend yt, and pray Hym of Hys grace and
helpe, and entende welle to God, and to zour neybors; and thow zour poor
heraftyr be to aquyte hem of her maleys, zet be mersyfulle to hem, and
God xale send zow the mor grace to have your entente in other thynggs.

I remembyr thys clawsys, be cause of the last letter that ze sent me.
I have sent to Hary Halman of Sporylle to helpe to gete as ze desyerd
me, and he canne not gette passyd v. or viij. at the most, and zet yt
wule not be but yf [_unless_] he cume that ze trust upon that xuld cume,
for they long a parte to hym. And Ryschard Sharman hathe asayed on hys
parte, and he cane not gette passyd v.; for thoo that long to us, thei
long also to our adversarys, and they have be desyerd be them, and they
woold nowte do for hem, and ther for they thynke to have magery of the
toder parte.

As for the jantylman that ye desyerd me to speke with, I spake with hys
wyfe, and sche told me he was not in thys cuntre, ner nowte woost wan he
xuld be her; and as for the toder man, he hath bowthe [_bought_] hym a
livery in Bromeholme Pryery, and have geve upe the woord [_world_], &c.

Item, as for mony, I kowde getee but x_li._ upon pledges, and that is
spent for zour maters her, for payeng of zour men that wern at Caster,
and other thynggs, and I woot not wer to gette non, nowther for suerte
ner for pleggs; and as for myn owyn lyvelod, I am so sympely payed ther
of that I fer me I xale be fayn to borow for my sylfe, or ell[es] to
breke up howsold or bothe.

As for the zeddyng [_yielding_] of the place at Caster, I trowe Wretyll
hathe told of the pawntements [_appointments_] how ytts delyvered.
I woold that [it] had be so her [_ere_] thys tyme, and zan [_then_] ther
xuld not a ben do so mykyle herte as ther is in dyverse weyes; for many
of our welewyllers arn putte to loosse for our saks, and I fer me that
[it] xale be long her yt be recumpensyd ageyn, and that xale cause other
to do the lesse for vus her aftyr.

I woold ze xuld [send] zour brother woord, and sum other that ze truste,
to see to zour owyn lyelod to sette yt in a rule, and to gader ther of
that may be had in haste, and also of Sir John Fastolf lyoeld that may
be gadyrd in pesybyle wyse. For as for Ryschard Calle, he wulle no mor
gadyr yt but yf ze comaund hym, and he woold fayn make hys . . acowntte,
and have zour good maystyr schepe, as ytts told me, and delyvere the
evydens of Bekkeham, and alle other thynggs that longyth to zow, that he
trustythe that ze wylle be hys good mayster heraftyr. And he sethe he
wylle not take non newe master tyle ze refuse hys servyse.

Remembyr that zowr lyvelod may be set in soche a rule that ye may knowe
how ytts, and wat is owyn to zow; for be my feythe I have holpyn as
mysche as I may and mor, savyng my sylfe, and therfor take hede er yt be
weers.

Thys letter was begune on Fryday was vij. nythe, and enddyd thys day
nexte afftyr Mychylmes Day. God kepe zow, and yeve zow grace to do as
wele as I woold ze dede; and I scharge zow be war that ze sette no lond
to morgage, for if eny avyse zow ther to, they arn not zowr frendds. Be
war be tymes myn avyse, &c. I trow yowr brother wyll geve zow tydyngs in
haste.

    [Footnote 57-2: [From Fenn, iv. 396.] This is written, as will be
    seen, in reply to No. 725.]

    [Footnote 57-3: Sir Thomas Howes.]


734

NOTE[59-1]

Inventory of household goods (including guns) left at Caister by Sir
John Paston at the entry of my Lord of Norfolk.

    [Footnote 59-1: [MS. Phillipps, 9735, No. 201.]]


735

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[60-1]

_To my master, Sir John Paston, in Flett-Stret._

[Sidenote: 1469 / OCT. 5]

Ryght worchepfull sir, I recomand on to you, praying yow that ye wyll in
all hast send me word how that ye wyll that Sir John Style, John
Pampyng, W. Mylsent, Nycolas Mondonet, T. Tomson shall be rwlyd, and
whedyr that they shall sek hem newe servysys or not; and Mathewe Bedford
also, for he hathe be with me this seson, and is fro my modyr. And if so
be that ye wyll have thes to abyde with yow, or eny of them, send word
whyche that they be; for betwyx thys and Halowmas my modyr is agreyd
that they shall have met and drynk of hyr for syche a serteyn wekly as
my modyr and yu and I can acord when we met. Notwithstandyng, if ye kowd
get Barney or eny of thes seyd folkys, whyche that ye wyll not kepe, eny
servyse in the mene seson, it wer more worchep for yow then to put them
from yow lyek masterles hondys [_hounds_]; for by my trowthe they ar as
good menys bodys as eny leve, and specyally Sir John Stylle and John
Pampyng. And I wer of power to kepe them and all thes befor rehersyd, by
trowthe they shold never depert fro me whyll I leveyd.

If ye send me word that I shall come to yow to London for to comon with
yow of eny mater, so God help me, I have neythyr mony to com up with,
nor for to tery with yow when I am ther but if [_unless_] ye send me
some; for by my trowthe thes werkys have causyd me to ley owt for yow
bettyr then x. or xij_li._, besyd that money that I had of my modyr,
whyche is abowt on viij_li._ God amend defowts; but this I warant yow,
with out that it be Mathew, whyche ye sent woord by John Thressher that
ye wold have to awayt on yow, ther is no man that was hyryd for the tyme
of thys sege that wyll axe yow a peny.

Also I pray yow send downe acomandment to Stutvylle, or to some awdyter,
to take acomptys of Dawbneys byllys; for hys executors ar sore callyd
upon for to admynyster by the Byshop, or ellys he seythe that he wyle
seqwester. Dawbeney set in hys dett that ye owt hym xij_li._ and x_s._
Whedyr it be so or nowt, hys byllys of hys owne hand wyll not lye, for
he mad hys byllys clere or then the sege com abowt us.

As for the evydence of Bekham, my modyr sent to Calle for hem; and he
sent hyr woord that he wold make hys acompts, and delyver the evydence
and all to gedyr. My modyr hathe sent to hym ayen for hem thys day. If
she sped, they shall be sent to yow in all hast, or ellys, and ye send
for me, I shall bryng hem with me. Send my modyr and me word who ye wyll
that have the rwyll of your lyvelod her in thys contre, and in what
forme that it shall be delt with. I wyll not make me mastyrfast with my
Lord of Norff., nor with non othyr, tyle I spek with yow; and ye thynk
it be to be don, get me a mastyr.

Dell corteysly with the Qwen and that felawshep, and with Mastras Anne
Hawte for Wappys,[61-1] tyll I spek with zow. Wretyn on Seynt Feythys
Evyn.

  J. PASTON.

By Sent George, I and my felawshep stand in fer of my Lord of Norff.
men, for we be thret sore, not withstandyng the save gardys[61-2] that
my felawshep have. As for me, I have non, nor non of your howsold men,
nor non wyll have; it wer shame to take it.

    [Footnote 60-1: [From Fenn, iv. 412.] This is a letter desiring
    instructions about the garrison of Caister after its surrender.]

    [Footnote 61-1: This expression ‘for Wappys’ I do not
    understand.--F. Perhaps Wappys may be a proper name.]

    [Footnote 61-2: _Save gardys._ This is printed ‘same gardys’ in
    Fenn, but is evidently a misreading; in the right-hand copy the
    word is ‘safeguards.’]


736

SIR JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[62-1]

_To Mestresse Margret Paston, be thys delyveryd._

[Sidenote: 1469 / [OCT.]]

Ryght worchypfull Moodre, I comand me to yow, and beseche yow of yowr
blyssyng and Gods. Thanke yow for yowr tendrenesse and helpe bothe to
me, my brother, and servants.[62-2]

      .      .      .      .      .      .      .

The Kynge is comyn to London, and ther came with hym, and roode ageyn
hym, the Duke of Glowcestr, the Duke of Suffolke, the Erle of Aroundell,
the Erle of Northumbreland, the Erle of Essex, the Lordes Harry and John
of Bokyngham, the Lord Dakres, the Lorde Chambreleyn, the Lorde
Montjoye, and many other Knyghtys and Sqwyers, the Meyr of London, xxij.
Aldremen, in skarlett, and of the Crafftys men of the town to the nombre
of CC., all in blewe. The Kynge come thorow Chepe, thowe it wer owt of
hys weye, be cawse he wold not be seyn, and he was accompanyed in all
peple with m^l. horsse, som harneysyd and som nat. My Lorde
Archebysshop[62-3] com with hym from Yorke, and is at the Moor,[62-4]
and my Lorde of Oxenfford roode to have mett the Kyng, and he is with my
Lorde Archebysshop at the Moor, and come nat to town with the Kynge;
some sey that they wer yesterdaye iij. myle to the Kyng wards from the
Moor, and that the Kyng sent them a massangr that they scholde com when
that he sent for them. I wot not what to suppose therin; the Kyng
hymselffe hathe good langage of the Lords of Clarance, of Warwyk, and of
my Lords of York [and] of Oxenford, seyng they be hys best frendys; but
hys howselde men have other langage, so that what schall hastely falle I
cannot seye.

My Lorde of Norffolke schall be her thys nyght. I schall sende yow mor
when I knowe mor.

Item, iff Ebysham come not home with myn oncle W., that than ye sende me
the ij. Frenshe bookys that he scholde have wretyn, that he may wryght
them her,

  JOHN PASTON, Kt.

    [Footnote 62-1: [From Fenn, i. 292.] The allusion in an unprinted
    passage in this letter to the approaching marriage of Richard
    Calle with Margery Paston proves it to be of the year 1469. In
    that year it appears by the dates of the privy seals that Edward
    IV. remained during the whole of September in Yorkshire, having
    been detained by Warwick at Middleham as a prisoner during the
    month of August; but he was in London as early as the 13th
    October.]

    [Footnote 62-2: Here, according to Fenn, follow passages touching
    ‘an account of monies, debts, &c., a dispute with his uncle
    William, and a desire to defer his sister Margery’s marriage with
    Richard Calle till Christmas.’]

    [Footnote 62-3: George Nevill, Archbishop of York.]

    [Footnote 62-4: _See_ p. 20, Note 3.]

  [[... that he may wryght them her,
  _text has “be”: corrected from Fenn_]]


737

ABSTRACT[63-1]

[JOHN PASTON] TO [SIR JOHN PASTON]

[Sidenote: 1469]

Has reckoned with Maryot. Accounts of Bekham. Has not spoken with W.
Bakton, but will before returning to Norwich. Means to visit Bekham on
his way thither. Sends copy of the condition wherein ye be bound to John
Maryot. As for Sir T. Mongomere’s man, etc.

Richard Calle says he has delivered to me all writings he had of you
except an endenture for letting Saxthorp, which is but a jape. All but a
rental of Snaylwell are but accounts, etc. He has delivered me four or
five court rolls of Sir J. Fastolff’s lands, of his own hand. He has
done reasonably well about showing me the arrears of your lifelode. ‘As
for his abiding, it is in Blakborow nunnery, a little fro Lynn, and our
unhappy sister’s also. And as for his service, there shall have no man
have it before you, and ye will. I hear not speak of none other service,
of no lord’s that he shall be in.’ Has not yet spoken with Daubney’s
executors, but will on his way homewards. Sends copy of the
inventory[63-2] he [John Paston] made on leaving Caister. Means to be at
Sporle to-morrow or Thursday, to see what may be made of the wood, and
who will give most for it.  .  .  .  .  (_MS. mutilated at the bottom._)

  [This letter is in the handwriting of John Paston, but the signature
  is lost. It is quite certain that it was written in 1469 after the
  surrender of Caister. Allusion is also made to the unpleasant
  subject of the engagement of Richard Calle and Margery Paston, who
  seem to have retired to Blackborough nunnery prior to their marriage.]

    [Footnote 63-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]

    [Footnote 63-2: _See_ No. 734.]


738

ABSTRACT[64-1]

[Sidenote: 1469 / NOV. 6]

Indenture between Sir John Paston, of the one part, and Roger Townsende,
gent., of the other part, containing covenants for the sale of the manor
of Est Beckham, and of all Paston’s other lands in Est Bekham, West
Bekham, Bodham, Sherryngham, Beeston near the Sea, Runeton, Shipden,
Felbrigg, Aylmerton, Sustede, and Gresham, which the said Sir John had
of the gift of John Mariet the elder of Est Bekham, for 100 marks, of
which he has received already £54, leaving £12, 13_s._ 4_d._ to be paid
by the said Roger at the Feast of St. Luke next coming. Dated 6th Nov. 9
Edw. IV.

  _Seal, with inscription_, ‘Si Dieu vuet.’

    [Footnote 64-1: [Add. Charter, 14,526, B.M.]]


739

ABSTRACT[64-2]

1469, 25 Nov. 9 Edw. IV. ‘In the priory of Saynt Marye Overy in
Suthwarke.’ Acknowledgment (in English) by Will. Yelverton, Knt., Just.
of K. B., of the receipt from Bishop Waynflete of £87, in full
satisfaction of all claims on Sir J. Fastolf by Jaquet, Duchess of
Bedford; solemnly promising also that he will not hereafter receive any
sums, great or small, on account of Fastolf’s goods, debts, or
possessions, without the assent of the Bishop, that he will at all times
be ready to seal such grants, &c., as the Bishop may require to be
sealed, and that he will not himself make or seal any grant, etc.,
without the Bishop’s will and agreement.

    [Footnote 64-2: The following abstract is taken from Mr. Macray’s
    Report on the MSS. in Magdalen College, Oxford.]


740

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[65-1]

_To Master Syr John Paston, Knyght._

[Sidenote: 1469 / DEC.]

Ryght worchepfull syr, I recomand me to you, &c. It is so that thys day
ther cam a good felaw to me, whyche may not be dyscoveryd, and let me
wet that my Lord of Norff. consayll hathe this Crystmas gotyn the two
wydows, whows husbands wer slayn at the sege of Caster, and have hem
bowndyn in a gret some that they shall swe a peel ayenst me and syche as
wer ther with me within the plase, and they be bownd also that they
shall relese no man within the apell namyd tyll syche tyme as my Lord of
Norff. wyll lycence them.

Item, the cawse is thys, as it is told me by dyvers, that ye meke no
more swte to my Lord for yourself than ye do, and therfor they do the
wors to me for your sake.

Item, as for my comyng up to London, so God help me, and I may chese,
I com not ther, for _argent me fawlt_, without apell or an inkyr
[_inquiry ?_] of som specyall mater of your cawse it. Item, I pray yow
remembyr Caleys, for I am put out of wagys in thys contre.

Item, I pray yow send me some tydyngs how the world gothe _ad
confortandum stomacum_.

Item, ye must purvey anewe atorny in thys contre. As for me, for our
maters and clamore is to gret, and our purse and wytte to slendyr, but I
wyle rubbe on as long as I maye bothe with myn owne, and other menys
that wyle do for me tyll better pese be.

Wretyn thys Saturdaye, at Norwcyche.

  J. P.

    [Footnote 65-1: [From Fenn, iv. 416.] It appears by the contents
    that this letter was written about Christmas after the siege of
    Caister. An appeal of murder was a process sued by the nearest
    relative of a person killed. It was quite independent of any
    prosecution for murder by the Crown, and no royal pardon was of
    any avail against it; but the appeal had to be brought within a
    year and a day of the fact.]

  [[... at Norwyche.
  _text has “Norwcyche”: corrected from Fenn_]]


741

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[66-1]

[Sidenote: 1470 / MARCH 1]

Ryght worchepfull Syr, I recomand me to yow aftyr the old maner,
sertyfyng yow that I have comonyd with my modyr for your coming hom, but
I can not fynd by hyr that she wyll depert with eny sylvyr for your
costis, for she and hyr cwrate[66-2] alegge mor poverte then ever wasse.
Item, as for your clok at Harcortis it wyll be nye Estern er it be redy,
for ther is stolyn owt of hys chaumbyr some of the ger that belongyd
therto, and that must have leyser to be mad ayen. Item, the caryer
forgat your byll behynd hym, but it was delyveryd all to gedyr, but it
shall be browght yow and the wyndas with the teles by the next caryer,
as myn orangys shall com to me I tryst. Dame Elyzabet Calthorp is a
fayir lady and longyth for orangis, thow she be not with chyld. Item,
I pray yow that ye wyll make aqwetance on to the person of Mawtby[66-3]
and to John Seyne as executors to John Dawbeney, for they wyll take non
admynystracyon of hys goodis tyll they be aqwetansyd of youre and my
modyr. Ye maye do it well j nough, so God help me; for I wot well ye owt
hym mony, and he nat yow, if so be that he wer trewe when he dyid, and I
wot well we fond hym nevyr on trew in hys lyve; but hys frendys and
othyr of the contre putt grett defawt in me that ther is no thyng don
for hym, seying that he myght do no more for us but lose hys lyfe in
your servyse and myn; and now he is half forgotyn among us. Wherfor I
pray yow let thys be sped.

Item, as for Doctor Pykenham, J. Pampyng can tell yow he is not in
Norwyche. When he comyth I shall spek with hym and send yow hys answer.
Item, as for myn oncyll Wylliam, I have grant to have a byll of hym what
every thyng lythe for; but all thyng is not yet in rest ayen that was
remevyd for the chyrchyng of my Lady Anne. As sonne as I have the byll I
shall send it yow and hys answer, whyche he wyll fyrst have plegyd
owght, and also whethyr he purposyth to do as he seyd by my graundamys
lond.

Item, Gefrey Spyrlyng hathe ofte spokyn to me to send to yow for to
undyrstand how ye will deell with hym for hys place in Norwyche, for he
seythe that he had lever have your good mastyrship ther in then eny
othyr manys good lordshep; for and ye wyll be hys good mastyr he wyll
swe no ferther, or ellys he must.

Item, a for (_sic_) for myn old reknyng, I shall make it up in hast and
send it yow for your bettyr remembrance, for as me thynkyth by your
wrytyng ye have nye forgetyn it; but I am rype j now in it for myn owne
dyscharge. Item, I pray yow, take in to your a ward a short murry
jornade[67-1] of myn whyche Jacobyn, Wykis woman, hathe lest that she be
flyttyng and that it be exchetyd. Item, I pray yow send me swyr tydyngis
of the world in hast.

As for the bysheop of Wynchestyr, W. Wyrceteyr told my modyr that he had
takyn charge x. dayis or then Pampyng cam hom; but he wenyth that the
bysshop wyll be a yenst yow, in so myche that [he[67-2]] avysyd my modyr
to consell yow that ye sholl labor to my Lord Cardynall[67-3] that the
seyd byshop shold not be amytted to take admynystracyon. No mor, &c.
Wretyn at Norwyche the fyrst daye off Marche.

  J. P.

I pray, get us a wyfe somwher, for _Melius est nubere in Domino quam
urere_. (ca^o primo.)[67-4]

   *   *   *

Noveritis universi per presentes me J. P. mylitem remisisse, &c. Roberto
Cotteler personæ ecclesiæ de Mawtby in comitatu Norfolk et Johanni Seyne
de Rollysby in eodem comitatu, executores testamenti et ultimæ
voluntatis Johannis Dawbeney armygeri, nuper defuncti, omnimodas
acciones, tam reales, &c. quos versus eundem Robertum sive Johannem
Seyne habui, habeo, &c., racione alicujus debyti dicti Johannis
Dawbeney, jam defuncti, mychi dicto J. Paston debite (_sic_) a principio
mundi usque in diem, &c. In cujus, &c. Datum, &c.

As for the yer of the Kyng, let it be set in, but as for the daye and
the monyth let it be owt, for the day must be aftyr probate of the wyll
and the admynystracyon takyng. I pray you, let thys be sped in all hast
possybyll; and as for your obligacyon and syche ger as belongyth to yow,
I shalbe swyr of it er they have the aqwetance.

Item, as for owyr afrayis her, J. Pampyng can tell yow; but and they get
me, ye loose a brodyr, _quod juratum est_.

It is good to do by the comandment of your mastyr whyll I am so well
boryn owte; thys my lord of Norffolk galantis send me woord dayly _ad
confortandum stomacum_. Ye must spek with your mastyr and comon some
remedye hastyly, or be God I enswyr yow, whyll owyr Dwk is thus
cherysheid with the kyng, ye nor I shall not have a man unbetyn or slayn
in thys contre, nor our sylfe nowthyr, as well ye as I, _quod juratum
est_ onys ayen. The Dwke, the Dwches and ther consell ar wrothe that ye
make no meanys to them your sylfe.

Item, I send yow Townysendis endentwre by John Pampyng.

    [Footnote 66-1: [Add. MS. 34,889, f. 192.] This letter may be
    dated 1470, by comparing the postscript with the beginning of No.
    742, which seems to have been written in answer to it. John
    Daubeney was killed at the siege of Caister in 1469. _See_ Nos.
    725, 733.]

    [Footnote 66-2: James Gloys.]

    [Footnote 66-3: Robert Cutler or Cotteler. _See_ next page.]

    [Footnote 67-1: Halliwell gives ‘jornet’ as ‘a kind of cloak’;
    ‘murrey’ was a dark red colour.]

    [Footnote 67-2: Omitted in MS.]

    [Footnote 67-3: Cardinal Bourchier.]

    [Footnote 67-4: The reference is as inaccurate as the quotation.
    The text referred to is 1 Cor. vii. 9: ‘Melius est enim nubere
    quam uri.’]


742

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[68-1]

_To John Paston, Esquier, beyng at Norwyche, be thys letter delyveryd._

[Sidenote: 1470 / MARCH]

I comande me to yow, letyng yow wete, &c.[68-2]

      .      .      .      .      .      .      .

Item, as for Mestresse Kateryn Dudle, I have many tymes recomandyd yow
to hyr, and she is noo thynge displeasyd with itt. She rekkythe not howe
many gentylmen love hyr; she is full of love. I have betyn the mater for
yow, your onknowleche, as I told hyr. She answerythe me, that sche woll
noon thys ij. yer, and I beleve hyr; for I thynke sche hathe the lyffe
that sche can holde hyr content with; I trowe she woll be a sore
laboryng woman this ij. yer for mede of hyr sowle.

And Mestresse Gryseacresse is sure to Selenger, with my Lady of Exestre,
a fowle losse.

Item, I praye yow speke with Harcort off the Abbeye, for a lytell
clokke, whyche I sent hym by James Gressham to amend, and that ye woll
get it off hym, and it be redy, and sende it me; and as for mony for hys
labor, he hathe another cloke off myne, whyche Sir Thomas Lyndes, God
have hys sowle! gave me; he may kepe that tyll I paye hym. Thys klok is
my Lordys Archebysshopis, but late not hym wete off it, and that itt
[be] easely caryed hyddre by yowr advyse.

Also as for orenges, I schall sende yow a serteyn by the next caryer.
And as for tydynge the berer hereoff schall infforme yow; ye most geve
credence to hym.

As for my goode spede, I hope well. I am offryd yit to have Mestresse
Anne Haulte, and I schall have help i nowe, as some say.[69-1]

.      .      .      .      .      .      .      .

Item, it is soo that I am halffe in purpose to com home with in a
monythe her afftr, or abowt Med Lente, or beffor Esterne, ondyr yowr
coreccon, iff so be that ye deme that [my] modre wolde helpe me to my
costys, x. mark or ther abowt; I praye feele hyr dysposicion and sende
me worde.

Item, I cannot tell yow what woll falle off the worlde, for the Kyng
verrely is dysposyd to goo in to Lyncoln schyr, and men wot not what
wyll falle ther off, ner ther afftre; they wene my Lorde off Norffolke
shall[69-2] brynke x.^ml. men.

Item, ther is comen a newe litell Torke, whyche is a wele vysagyd
felawe, off the age off xl. yere; and he is lower than Manuell by a
hanffull, and lower then my lytell Tom by the schorderys, and mor lytell
above hys pappe; and he hathe, as he seyde to the Kynge hymselffe, iij.
or iiij. sonys, chyldre, iche one off hem as hyghe and asse lykly as the
Kynge hymselffe; and he is leggyd ryght i now, and it is reportyd that
hys pyntell is as long as hys legge.

Item, I praye yow schewe, or rede to my moodre suche thynges as ye
thynke is for her to know, afftre yowr dyscression; and to late hyr
undrestond off the article off the trete between Syr Wylliam Yelverton
and me.

Item, my Lorde of Warwyk, as it is supposyd, schall goo with the Kynge
in to Lyncolne schyre; some men seye that hys goyng shall doo goode, and
som seye that it dothe harme.

I praye yow evyr have an eyghe to Caster, to knowe the rewle ther, and
sende me worde, and whyther my wyse Lorde and my Lady be yit as sottyt
[_? besotted_] uppon it as they were; and whether my seyd Lorde
resortythe thyddre as offte as he dyd or nott; and off the dysposycion
off the Contre.

  J. P., K.

    [Footnote 68-1: [From Fenn, ii. 28.] From the reference to the
    King’s being about to go into Lincolnshire, and what is said of
    the Earl of Warwick, it may be clearly inferred that this letter
    was written on the outbreak of the insurrection of Sir Robert
    Welles in the beginning of March 1470.]

    [Footnote 68-2: Here (according to Fenn) follows an account of
    bills and receipts, etc.]

    [Footnote 69-1: Here (according to Fenn) follows an account of
    some disputes between Sir William Yelverton and Sir John Paston,
    his uncle William, etc., of no consequence.]

    [Footnote 69-2: _shall._ This word is not in Fenn’s left-hand or
    literal transcript, but is given as part of the text in the
    right-hand copy.]


743

ANONYMOUS TO JOHN PASTON[70-1]

_To my Cosyn, J. Paston._

[Sidenote: 1470 / MARCH 27]

The King camme to Grantham, and ther taried Thoresday all day; and ther
was headed Sir Thomas Dalalaunde, and on John Neille, a greate capteyn;
and upon the Monday next after that at Dancastr, and ther was headed Sir
Robert Wellys, and a nothr greate capteyn; and than the King hadde warde
that the Duk of Clarence and the Erle of Warwick was att Esterfeld
[_Chesterfield_], xx. mile from Dancastre.

And upon the Tewesday att ix. of the bell, the King toke the feld, and
mustered his people; and itt was seid that wer never seyn in Inglond so
many goodly men, and so well arreiyed in a feld. And my Lord was
whorsshupfully accompanyed, no lord ther so well; wherfor the King gaffe
my Lord a greate thanke.

And than the Duk of Clarence and the Erle of Warwik harde that the King
was comyng to them warde, in contynent they departed and wente to
Manchestre in Lancasshire, hopyng to have hadde helpe and socour of the
Lord Stanley, butt in conclucion ther they hadde litill favor, as itt
was enformed the King, and so men sayn they wente westward, and sommen
demen to London. And whan the King harde they wer departed and gon, he
went to York, and came theder the Thoresday next aftr, and ther camme in
to hym all the gentilmen of the shire; and uppon our Lady Day [he] made
Percy Erle of Northumberland, and he that was Erle affore Markeys
Muntakew. And [so][71-1] the King is purposed to come southwarde, God
send hym god spede.

Writen the xxvij. day of March.

  FOR TROWYTH.

    [Footnote 70-1: [From Fenn, ii. 36.] This letter gives an account
    of the suppression of the rebellion in Lincolnshire in 1470.]

    [Footnote 71-1: This word is not in the text of Fenn’s literal
    transcript, but it is given without brackets in the transcript in
    modern spelling.]


744

ABSTRACT[71-2]

WILLIAM WORCESTER TO ----

[Sidenote: 1470]

Letter in English, on paper (signed W. W., but unaddressed), desiring
some one to propose to ‘my Lord’ [the Bishop of Winchester?] the
obtaining of a letter from Sir John Paston to the tenants of Titchwell
that he will not claim any rents from them, and another from ‘my Lord,’
to the same effect, on behalf of Sir William Yelverton; and the sending
a warrant to expend 4 or 6 marks upon making up the sea banks before the
Titchwell pastures, because at Spring the sea breaks in upon them.
Desires to know whether Sir W. Yelverton’s advice shall be taken upon
business matters. ‘Frere’ Geffrey Westvale is going to be created Doctor
in Theology at Cambridge, at the Feast of St. John, who twenty years
past, when at Yarmouth convent, belonged to ‘my Maister Fastolf’; and
Sir Thomas Howys, a month before his decease, promised to help him on
Mr. Fastolf’s order. He would have come now to ‘my Lord’ to ask his alms
had not the writer letted him. Desires to be informed whether ‘my Lord’
will help him. ‘Maister Briston yn lykewyse Maister Spicer, and Maister
Stevyns, trustyn appon me and dyvers others to speke to my Lord for a
relyeve,’ and Thomas Fastolf and Milcent Fastolf, and many others, ‘that
make me noyed and werye.’

    [Footnote 71-2: [From MS. Titchwell, 120, in Magdalen College,
    Oxford.] From internal evidence it would seem that this letter
    must have been written shortly before that which follows it. The
    abstracts of these two letters have been kindly supplied to me by
    Mr. Macray.]


745

ABSTRACT[72-1]

[Sidenote: 1470 / MAY 17]

Letter in English from W. Wyrcestre to Bishop Wayneflete.--Has been at
Tychewell to endeavour to let the manor and farm, but none of the
farmers there will take it without guarantees from Sir John Paston and
Sir William Yelverton in writing against any distraint.  .  .  .  .  the
younger, who owes £9, will come to the Bishop about the letting. The
writer represents his own poor condition. Has been at charges ten years
in London, and in riding on the infinite process of ‘my Maister
Fastolf’s testament yn the court of audience.’ Is now obliged to retire
from London to Cambridge in order to live cheaply. Had been promised 25
marks on Paston’s behalf, 20 marks for ever of Fastolf’s lands, 5 marks
of fee for his life, and £15 worth of land for ever. Has not had clearly
8 marks.

    [Footnote 72-1: [From MS. Titchwell, 199, in Magdalen College,
    Oxford.]]


746

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[72-2]

_To Syr John Paston, Knyght, or to Thomas Stompys, to delyver to the
seyd Syr John._

[Sidenote: 1470 / JUNE 22]

Ryght worchepfull syr, and my specyall good brodyr, I recomand me to
yow; and for as myche as I can not send yow good tydyngs, ye shall have
syche as I knowe.

It is so that on Wednysday last past ye and I, Pampyng, and Edmund Broom
were endyttyd of felonye at the Sessyons her in Norwyche for shotyng of
a gonne at Caster in August last past, whyche goone slowghe two men, I,
Pampyng and Broom as pryncypall, and ye as accessary; notwithstandyng
Townysend[73-1] and Lomner held an oppynyon that the verdytt is voyd,
for ther wer ij. of th’enqwest that wold not agre to th’endyttment. And
in as myche as they ij. wer agreyd in othyr maters, and not in that, and
that they two wer not dyschargyd fro the remnant at syche tym as that
verdyth of yowyr endytment was govyn, ther oppynyon is that all the
vordyght is voyde, as well of all othyr maters as of yowyr. Whedyr ther
opynyon be good or not, I can not determyne, nor them sylf neythyr.

I pray yow let not thys mater be slept, for I can thynk that my Lord of
Norff. consaylle wyll cawse the wedows to tak an apell, and to remeve it
up in to the Kyngs Benche at the begynyng of this term. Townysend hathe
promysyd me that he shall be at London on Twysday next comyng, and then
ye may comon with hym in that mater, and take hys avyse.

Item, Townysend and Lomner thynk that and ye have good consayll, ye may
justyfye the kepyng of the plase for the pesybyll possessyon that ye
have had in it mor then iij. yeer; but in conclusyon, all thys is doo
for nowght ellys but for to enforse yow to take a dyreccyon with my Lord
of Norff.

I undyrstood by R. Sothewell--for he and I comonyd in thys mater ryght
largely betwyx hem and me--in so myche he tellyth me that and I be at
London in the wek next aftyr Seynt Petyr, at whych tyme he shall be ther
hym sylf, he seyth that my Lady hathe promysyd me hyr good ladyshep, and
sent me woord by hym, in as myche as he spak for me to hyr, that she
wold remembyr myn old servyse, and for get the gret dysplesyr in syche
wyse that I shall undyrstand that the swtte that I have mad to my Lord
hyr husbond and hyr shall torne to your avantage and myn, more then we
weene as yett or shall undyrstand tyll syche tyme as I have spokyn with
hyr good grace. And upon thys promesse I have promysyd Sothewell to meet
with hym at London that same weeke next aftyr Seynt Petyr; wherfor I
wold passyngly fayne that ye wer in London at that season, or nye
abowght London, so that I myght undyrstand at your plase wher that I
myght spek with yow or then I spek with my Lady.

I propose to go to Canterbery[74-1] on foot thys next week, with Godds
grace, and so to com to London fro thense. I pray yow se that I be safe
for Parker and Henry Coletts mater.

Sothewell[74-2] told me thys, that if so be that ye wyll your sylf, ye
shall have bothe goode lordshep and ladyshep, and mony or lond, or both,
and all your maters set cler. What that he menyth, I can not sey. As for
all othyr maters in thys contre, I shall do as well as I may for fawt of
monye tyll I spek with yow. I have many collars on, as I shall tell yow
when I come.

No more, but God preserve yow and yours. Wretyn at Norwyche, Fryday next
aftyr Corpus Christi Daye.

  J. P.

I ded as myche as I kowd to have lettyd th’endyttment, but it wold not
be, as I shall enform you; and Townysend knowyth the same.

    [Footnote 72-2: [From Fenn, iv. 428.] As this letter refers to an
    incident in the siege of Caister as having taken place ‘in August
    last,’ there can be no doubt about the date.]

    [Footnote 73-1: Probably Roger Townsend, afterwards Justice of the
    Common Pleas.]

    [Footnote 74-1: On pilgrimage to the shrine of Saint Thomas
    Becket, I suppose.--F.]

    [Footnote 74-2: Richard Southwell, Esq. of Wood-Rising. He
    acquired this estate by marrying Amy, daughter and co-heir of Sir
    Edmund Wichingham, Knight.--F.]


747

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[74-3]

_To Syr John Paston, Knyght, or to Thomas Stomppys, to delyver to the
seyd Syr John._

[Sidenote: 1470 / JUNE 25]

As I sent yow woord by a lettyr that John Wymondham browght to London,
J. Pampyng is endyghtyd of felony, and Edmund Broon as princypallys, and
ye as axcessary, for schotyng of agonne in Awgust last past, whyche
gonne kyllyd ij. men; and I trowe that my Lord of Norff. consayll wyll
make on of the wedows, or bothe, to swe an apell up on the same
endyghtment thys terme. Wherfor I pray yow se well to thys mater, that
when it is sertyfyid in to the Kyngys Benche, Broom and Pampyng may have
warnyng that they may purvey for hem self, if ther com eny _capyas_
owght for hem. Townysend can tell yow all the mater.

Also ye must in eny wyse be ware, for my grauntdam[75-1] and myn Lady
Anne[75-2] and myn Oncyll Wyllam shall be at London within thes viij. or
x. dayis, and I wot well it is for nowght ellys but to make myn Oncyll
Wyllam swyr of hyr lond, notwithstandyng she hath reryd affyn of it be
for Goodreed,[75-3] the Justyse, in my grauntfadyrs dayis, and my modyr
tellyth me that ye have the copye of the same fyne; I wold avyse yow to
have it redy, what so evyr betyd. I trow they wyll be the more besy
abowght the same mater, because they thynk that ye dar not com in
London, nor at Westmenstyr to lett [_stop_] them; but if so be that ye
have not the copy of the same fynne, look that ye spare for no cost to
do serche for itt, for it wyll stand yow on hand, I feell by the
werkyng.

Thys day sevennyght I trust to God to be forward to Caunterbery at the
ferthest, and upon Saterday com sevennygh I tryst to God to be in
London; wherfor I pray yow leve woord at yowr plase in Fleet Strett wher
I shall fynd yow, for I purpose not to be seyn in London tyll I have
spook with yow.

I pray yow remembyr thes maters, for all is doon to make yow to drawe to
an ende with thes Lordys that have your lond fro yow. No more, but I
pray God send yow your herttys desyir in thees maters and in all othyr.

Wretyn at Norwyche, the Monday next aftyr Seynt John Baptyst.

  J. P.

    [Footnote 74-3: [From Fenn, iv. 434.] This letter, it will be
    seen, refers in the beginning to the same matter as the
    preceding.]

    [Footnote 75-1: Agnes Paston, widow of William Paston, the Judge.]

    [Footnote 75-2: Anne, daughter of Edmund Beaufort, Duke of
    Somerset, married William Paston, the uncle of Sir John
    Paston.--F.]

    [Footnote 75-3: William Goodrede was created a Serjeant-at-Law in
    1425. In 1431 he was appointed King’s Serjeant, and in 1434 became
    a Justice of the King’s Bench.--F.]


748

ABSTRACT[76-1]

[Sidenote: 1470 / JULY 3]

Indenture between Sir John Paston and Edmund Shaa, goldsmith, London,
concerning 20 dishes and a saucer of silver pledged to the latter, 3rd
July 10 Edw. IV.

    [Footnote 76-1: [From Paston MSS.]]


749

ABSTRACT[76-2]

[Sidenote: 1470 / JULY 8]

Indenture, dated London, 8th July 10 Edw. IV., whereby Sir John Paston
places in pawn to Stephen Kelke, goldsmith, of London, 16 pottingers,
weighing 22 lb. 10½ oz. Troy weight, for £40, till Whitsuntide
following.

    [Footnote 76-2: [From Add. Charter 17,249, B.M.]]


750

ABSTRACTS[76-3]

FASTOLF’S LANDS

[Sidenote: 1470 / JULY 14]

‘11. A triparted indenture betweene William Bishop of Winton and John
Paston, Knight, and others, touching the intent of two feoffmentes of
the Bishop of Wynton, the one of the mannors of Drayton and Tolthorp, in
the county of Norfolk and the city of Norwich, which were somtymes Sir
John Falstofs; the other of the mannors of Wynterton, cald Bregmiles
(?), of Reppys in Bastwyke, the third part of the mannor of Rowneham,
londes and tenementes cald Cutts in Haringby, and lands cald Buley in
Stokesby, to Guy Fairfax, John Paston, Squier, et aliis. July 14, Edw.
IV. 10.’

‘17. Relaxatio Johannis Paston, Georgii Arch. Cant. et aliorum Willielmo
Waynflet totius juris de et in omnibus maneriis, terris, &c. quæ fuerunt
Johannis Falstolf in comit’ Norf., exceptis manerio de Castre et
Spensers in Haringby, ac terris vocat’ Vaux, Redham, et Bosoms, et
maner’ de Hayleydon, Drayton, et Tolthorp. Julii 14, Edw. IV. 10.’

‘28. An indenture contayning mutuall releases of the Bishop of Wynton to
John Paston, Knight, et c^a. July 14, Edw. IV. 10.’

‘29 and 61. An indenture containing the agreement betweene Wylliam
Wainflet, Bishop of Wynton, and Sir John Paston, concerning Sir John
Fastolfes landes and goods. July 14, Edw. IV. 10.’

This last document, of which there is another copy or draft, numbered 36
in the Index, is more fully described, as follows, by Mr. Macray, in the
Fourth Report of the Historical MSS. Commission:--

  1470, 14 July, 10 Edw. IV. Indenture tripartite (very long, in
  English) between Bishop Wayneflete and Sir John Paston, Knight,
  containing an agreement for the termination of disputes between the
  executors of the will of Sir John Fastolf, whereby the property of
  the latter has been much wasted; dividing the manors between the
  Bishop and Paston, and providing for the foundation of seven priests
  and seven poor scholars in Magdalene College; Paston to deliver up
  all deeds and muniments to the Priory of St. Mary Overy, in
  Southwark, to be put in a chest, locked with two locks and two keys,
  of which the Bishop to have one and Paston the other, and the Bishop
  to bring thither also all his deeds; one part of this indenture to
  remain with each of the parties, and the third with the Prior of St.
  Mary Overy.

    [Footnote 76-3: The following entries are taken from the old index
    of deeds and writings relating to Norfolk and Suffolk, preserved
    in the tower of Magdalen College, Oxford.]


751

PAMPYNG TO SIR JOHN PASTON[77-1]

_To my most reverent and worshipfull master, Sir John Paston, Knyght._

[Sidenote: 1470 / JULY 15]

Right worshipfull sir and my good master, I recomaund me unto yow in my
moost lowly wise. And please yow to wete I have with the mony ye sent me
by Judy rewardid my felaship as ye comaundid, wretyn in a bille closid
herin; and as for William Milsent I lete hym wete hough ye undirstood he
was disposed to goo hoom to his fadere, wherof ye were pleasid and wold
he shuld do so. He said he intendid not to be with his fadir, ner it was
not in his power so to do; nevirthelesse he is home to his fadir and
ther abidith, but what he purposith to do I wote not. Davy is at home
and takyth heed to his lond. Homeworth is content and gooth to his
labour. As for Stompis, I have be with the Abbot of Sen Benetts for hym
as ye comaundid. And he recomaundith hym to yow, and said to me he was
right glad that ye wold send to hym for any servaunt ye had, saying that
if he coud do any thyng for yow, and for any servaunt of yours, he wold
do it feithfully. And also he said he wold not fayle yow whill he levid
in that he coud and myght do, trustyng heraftir to have your help and
favour in that he shall have a do. And he told me and Stompis bothe,
whanne so evir he come he shuld be welcome, and that he wold do as welle
to hym as to fewe servauntes he had for yowr sake, and that he wold kepe
hym for yow. As for my self my mastres saith she woll geve me mete and
drynk for a season; nevirthelesse I am warnyd to be ware, for it is told
me that ther is processe out upon the appele ayens me and other;
wherfore I beseche yow that that mater may be take heed to as ye may,
that we myght have knowlech of any processe ther be, that we may be
ware, for I thynk verely, and I or any other come in ther hands this
world, we shuld not escape without shame at the leest.

Item, as for the remnaunt of the mony biside this bille, ye owe to the
parson of Sent Edmondes Caster for iiij. combe malt, and ij. combe
whete, x_s._ whiche I promysid hym to pay; and Rob. Newton lymebrenner
for lyme, xiij_s._ iiij_d._, calling upon me for it; and Robert Bery for
shoyng, x_s._; and if it please yow that I make payment herof there
shall remayne in my handes xxiij_s._ iiij_d._ And what ye woll I do
herin, I beseche yow to send me word. Judy hath be with Thom Fastolff,
he can telle yow answer in that mater. As for the rewle at Caster, they
selle and make mony of such stuffe as they fond there, and kepe other
rewle that the contre is full sory and irk of, and of my lordes men
resortyng to hem, and riden about the contry onknowen, and by berynges
on hand[78-1] take large bribys. I pray God be your spede and send yow
some good meane for your wele and ease to them that owe yow servise.
Wretyn at Norwich the Monday next aftir Relik Sonday,

  Your pore servaunt,

  PAMPYNG.

    [Footnote 77-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] Reference is made in this
    letter to the appeal which the two widows were to sue against Sir
    John Paston. _See_ Nos. 746, 747.]

    [Footnote 78-1: _See_ vol. ii. p. 110, Note 1.]


752

MARGARET PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[79-1]

[Sidenote: 1470 / JULY 15]

I grete yow well and send yow Goddes blissyng and myne, letyng yow wete
that your fermours have brought me a gret bille of reparacion, the which
I send yow, with lx_s._ in mony. I wold have had the residue of the mony
of them, and they said it was your agrement that this reparacion shuld
be do and alowed now at this payment, and so I coud get no more mony of
them. And they say that the parson[79-2] was prevy to the reparacion. If
ye were thus agreed and woll have the reparacion examined ye may send
word; but I wold ye shuld purvey for your self as hastely as ye may, and
come home and take heed to your owne and to myn therto, otherwise thanne
ye have do bifore this, bothe for my profite and for yours, or ellis I
shall purvey for my self otherwise in hast, so that I trust shall be
more ease and avayle for me and non ease nor profite to yow in tyme to
come. I have litell help nor comfort of non of yow yet, God geve me
grase to have heraftir. I wold ye shuld assay whedir it be more
profitable for yow to serve me thanne for to serve such masters as ye
have servid afore this, and that ye fynde mooste profitable theraftir do
in tyme to come. Ye have assayed the werld resonabilly, ye shall knowe
your self the bettir heraftir. I pray God we may be in quyete and in
rest with oure own from hens forth. My power is nat so good as I wold it
were for your sake and other; and if it were, we shuld not longe be in
daungere. God brynge us oute of it; who have yow in His kepynge. Wretyn
with onhertes ease the Monday next aftir Relike Sonday.

  By your Modir.

    [Footnote 79-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter, although
    subscribed ‘By your mother,’ is neither signed nor addressed. It
    is, however, undoubtedly from Margaret Paston to her son Sir John.
    It is written in Pampyng’s hand, and seems to be of the same year
    as his own letter immediately preceding, which is dated on the
    same day.]

    [Footnote 79-2: Sir Thomas Howes.]


753

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[80-1]

_.  .  .  .  . Paston, &c._

[Sidenote: 1470 / AUG. 5]

Brother, I comand me to yow, &c.  .  .  .[80-2] Also telle John Pampyng
that the mayde at the Bulle at Cludeys at Westminster sent me on a tyme
by hym to the Moor a rynge of goolde to a tookne, whyche I hadde not off
hym. Wherffor I wolle he scholde sende it hyedre, ffor sche most have
itt ageyn, or ellys v_s._, ffor it was not hyrrys. Item, I praye yow be
redye; the mater qwykennythe bothe ffor yowe and yowres as well as ffor
us and howrys.

As ffor tydynges, my Lorde Erchebysshop[80-3] is at the Moor, but ther
is beleffte with hym dyverse off the Kynges servantes, and as I
understond he hathe lysence to tarry ther tyll he be sente ffor. Ther be
many ffolkes uppe in the northe, soo that Percy[80-4] is not able to
recyst them; and soo the Kynge hathe sente ffor hys ffeeodmen to koom to
hym, for he woll goo to putt them downe. And soom seye that the Kynge
sholde come ageyn to London, and that in haste, and as it is sayde
Cortenayes be londyd in Devenschyr, and ther rewle.

Item, that the Lordes Clarance and Warwyk woll assaye to londe in
Inglonde evyrye daye, as ffolkes ffeer.

I praye yow late not John Mylsent be longe ffrom me, with as moche as
can be gaderyd: and also that ye wryght to me off all thynges that I
have wretyn to yow ffor, so that I may have answer off every thynge.
Other thynges Bacheler Walter, berer heroff, schall informe yow.

Wretyn at London, the Sondaye nexte beffor Seynt Lawrence Daye.[81-1]

Also my brother Edmonde is not yet remembryd. He hathe not to lyff with,
thynk on hym, &c.

  JOHN PASTON, KT.

    [Footnote 80-1: [From Fenn, ii. 46.] This letter, as it will be
    seen from the contents, was written at the period just before the
    restoration of Henry VI.]

    [Footnote 80-2: Here follows an order about searching for some
    writings, etc.--F.]

    [Footnote 80-3: This must mean George Neville, Archbishop of York,
    and brother to the Earl of Warwick, who seems to have been
    suspected by the King, and left at the Moor as a kind of state
    prisoner.--F.]

    [Footnote 80-4: Henry Percy, who was restored to the Earldom of
    Northumberland this year on its surrender by John Nevill, Lord
    Montague. _See_ No. 743.]

    [Footnote 81-1: St. Laurence’s day is the 10th of August.]

  [[... Bacheler Walter, berer heroff, schall informe yow.
  _final . missing or invisible_]]


754

ABSTRACT[81-2]

[Sidenote: 1470 / AUG. 7]

Indenture, dated London, 7th Aug., 10 Edw. IV., whereby Sir John Paston
puts in pawn to Ric. Rawlyn of London, grocer, 2 chargers and 4
potengers, weighing 11 lb. 1¾ oz. silver, for £20, till Whitsunday
following.

    [Footnote 81-2: [From Add. Charter 17,250, B.M.]]

  [[weighing 11 lb. 1¾ oz. silver
  _period in “oz.” missing_]]


755

ABSTRACT[81-3]

[Sidenote: 1470]

1470, 10 Aug., 10 Edw. IV., at Eshher. Undertaking in English by John
Paston, Esq., son of John Paston, Esq., who was one of the feoffees and
executors of Sir John Fastolf, that whereas Bishop Waynflete, also one
of the feoffees, and now sole executor, has taken upon him to perform
the will of the said Sir John, so far forth as it may be performed (it
being in most substance not yet performed, and his property wasted and
devoured), out of his manors and lands in Essex, Surrey, Norfolk,
Suffolk, and the city of Norwich, he (the said John Paston) will do true
and faithful service to the said Bishop, and will be aiding and
assisting to him and Magdalen College, in order that the lands may be
let to their greatest profit, he being rewarded by the Bishop, to show
his very good will to the due performing of Fastolf’s will; and that
before the Feast of All Saints next he will deliver up to the said
Bishop all charters, deeds, evidences, rentals, accounts, etc.,
pertaining to any of the said manors, excepting such as concern solely
the manor of Castre, which by covenant of the said Bishop with Sir John
Paston, Knight, brother of the said John Paston, Squire, must remain
with the same Sir John.

    [Footnote 81-3: The following abstract, like some others
    preceding, is taken from Mr. Macray’s Report to the Historical
    MSS. Commission on the Records of Magdalen College, Oxford.]

  [[1470, 10 Aug., 10 Edw. IV., at Eshher.
  _spelling unchanged_]]


756

ABSTRACTS[82-1]

PAINTER’S WORK

[Sidenote: 1470]

1. Account of payments to Robert Spery, servant of Vyol, and others, for
working at the Frerys[82-2] in June and July; also for varnish, lead,
earthen pans, yellow ochre, oil, bristles to make brushes, etc., for
painter’s work.

_Endorsed_: ‘Vialles byll comprisid in the iij. rolles of stuff and
werkmanship to A. P.[82-3] place and the Freris, which, as Clargynet
understondith, is paid to Viall.’

‘Memorandum: j. copy of this bill remayneth amonges the billes of
werkmanship at the White Freres and Baretts place, and a noder among the
billes of plate and Vialles plegis.’

2. ‘Bill indented,’ 15th Aug. 10 Edw. IV., between William Paston, Esq.,
and Thomas Vyall of Norwich, painter, relative to the pledging of
certain coral beads and plate to the former, for £5.

3. Account of sums owing to one Vyall for certain persons ‘at the
Freris,’ during August, September, and October. Total, 32_s._ 10_d._

_Endorsed_: ‘Viall’s reckoning written in the roll of the Freris werke
not paid, and must be allowed of the £5 that was lent to Viall not yet
content again.’

‘Memorandum: one copy of this bill remaineth amongs the bills of
workmanship at the White Freris and Baretts place, and another bill
amongs the bills of plate and pledges.’

    [Footnote 82-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]

    [Footnote 82-2: Apparently the White Friars at Norwich.]

    [Footnote 82-3: Agnes Paston’s?]

  [[... not yet / content again.’
  _close quote missing_]]


757

FASTOLF’S COLLEGE[82-4]

[Sidenote: 1470 / AUG. 27]

‘4. John Paston, Squier, bindes himself to doe true and faithfull
service to the Bishop of Winton, and to be ayding to his college and
other his officers and tenants, for the landes of Sir John Falstolf, and
to deliver to him all deedes, evidences, etc., except such as concerne
the manor of Castre. Aug. 27, Edw. IV. 10.’

    [Footnote 82-4: This entry is from the same old index of deeds in
    Magdalen College, Oxford, referred to in previous Nos.]


758

EDWARD IV. TO WILLIAM SWAN[83-1]

_To oure welbelovid William Swan, Gentilman._

  R. E.

  BY THE KING.

[Sidenote: 1470 / SEPT. 7]

Trusty and welbeloved, we grete you well. And for soo muche as we be
credibly acertayned that our auncient ennemyes of Fraunce and our
outward rebells and traitors be drawe to gadre in acorde, and entende
hastily to lande in our countre of Kent, or in the parties therof ner
adjonyng, with grete might and power of Frenshemen, utterly to destroie
us and our true subgietts, and to subverte the comon wele of the same
our royalme: We straitly charge and commaunde you, upon the feyth and
liegeaunce that ye bare unto us, that ye arredie you with alle the
felaship ye can make, and as sone as ye may undrestonde that thay lande
in our said countie or nerbye, that you draw thider, as we have
comaunded othere our subgietts to doo, and put you in uttremost devoir
with thaim to resiste the malice of our said ennemyes and traitours; and
if thai and ye be not of power soo to doo, that thanne ye drawe you to
our citie of London, by which tyme we trust to be there in our owne
personne or nerby; and if we be not that, that thanne ye do farther all
ye shal bee commaunded by our Counsail there, upon the payne above said.

Yeven undre oure signet at oure citie of York, the vij. day of Septembr.

    [Footnote 83-1: [From Fenn, iv. 438.] This letter does not
    properly belong to the Paston correspondence. It was copied by
    Fenn from an original in the library of Brigg Price Fountaine,
    Esq. of Narford, in Norfolk, nephew and heir of the celebrated
    antiquary, Sir Andrew Fountaine. The MS. was contained in a
    volume of State Papers, some of them originals, and some copies,
    of various dates, which had belonged to Sir Edward Coke.

    The date of the document is undoubtedly in September 1470, when
    Edward was at York, anticipating the invasion of Clarence and
    the Earl of Warwick, aided by the King of France.]




THE PASTON LETTERS

_Henry VI. Restored_




759

JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[84-1]

_To my ryght worchipfull Modyr, Margaret Paston, be thys delyuered._

[Sidenote: 1470 / OCT. 12]

Aftyr humbyll and most dew recommendacyon, as lowly as I can, I beseche
yow of yowr blyssyng. Plesyt yow to wet that, blyssyd be God, my brodyr
and I be in good hele; and I tryst that we shall do ryght well in all
owyr maters hastyly; ffor my Lady of Norff.[84-2] hathe promyssyd to be
rewlyd by my Lord of Oxynforthe[84-3] in all syche maters as belonge to
my brodyr and to me; and as for my Lord of Oxynforthe, he is bettyr Lord
to me, by my trowthe, than I can wyshe hym in many maters; for he sente
to my Lady of Norff. by John Bernard only for my mater, and for non
othyr cause, my onwetyng [_i.e._ without my knowledge], or wythout eny
preyer of me, for when he sente to hyr I was at London, and he at
Colchestyr, and that is a lyeklyod he remembyrthe me.

The Dwk and the Dwchess swe to hym as humbylly as evyr I dyd to them; in
so myche that my Lord of Oxynforth shall have the rwyll of them and
thers, by ther owne desyirs and gret meanys.

As for the ofyces that ye wrot to my brodyr for and to me, they be for
no poore men; but I tryst we shall sped of othyr ofyseys metly for us,
for my Mastyr the Erle of Oxynforthe bydeth me axe and have. I trow my
brodyr Syr John shall have the Constabyllshep of Norwyche Castyll, with
xx_li._ of ffee; all the Lordys be agreyd to it.

Tydyngs, the Erle of Wyrcestyr[85-1] is lyek to dye this day, or to
morow at the ferthest. John Pylkyngton, Mr. W. att Clyff, and Fowler ar
takyn, and in the Castyll of Pomfrett, and ar lyek to dye hastyly, with
owte they be dead. Sir T. Mongomere and Joudone be takyn; what shall
falle of hem I can not sey.

The Qwen[85-2] that was, and the Dwchess of Bedford,[85-3] be in
seyntuary at Westmestyr; the Bysheop of Ely[85-4] with othyr Bysheopys
ar in Seynt Martyns. When I here more, I shall send yow more. I prey God
send yow all your desyrs. Wretyn at London on Seynt Edwards Evyn.

  Your sone and humbyll servant,

  J. P.

Modyr, I beseche yow that Brome may be spoken to, to gadyr up my syllvyr
at Gwton in all hast possybyll, for I have no mony. Also that it lyek
yow that John Mylsent may be spoken to, to kep well my grey horse, and
he be alyve, and that he spare no met on hym, and that he have konnyng
lechys to look to hym. As for my comyng hom, I knowe no serteynte, for I
terry tyll my Lady of Norff. com to go thorow with the maters, and she
shall not be here tyll Sonday.

    [Footnote 84-1: [From Fenn, ii. 50.] The contents of this letter
    clearly refer to the state of matters on the restoration of Henry
    VI.]

    [Footnote 84-2: Elizabeth, daughter of John Talbot, first Earl of
    Shrewsbury, was the wife of John Mowbray, fifth Duke of Norfolk.]

    [Footnote 84-3: John de Vere, a staunch Lancastrian.]

    [Footnote 85-1: John Tiptoft, Lord Treasurer and Chief-Constable
    of England. He was beheaded on a charge of cruelty, 18th October
    1470.]

    [Footnote 85-2: Elizabeth Woodville, Queen of Edward IV.]

    [Footnote 85-3: Jaquetta of Luxemburg, Duchess-Dowager of Bedford,
    widow of Sir Richard Woodville, the mother of Edward’s queen.]

    [Footnote 85-4: William Gray.]


760

THE DUKE OF SUFFOLK’S MEN[86-1]

_To the Baillies, Constables, and Chamberleyns of our Burgh of Eye, and
to everch of them._

THE DUKE OF SUFF.

[Sidenote: 1470 / OCT. 22]

For asmuche as Edmond Lee and John Barker, which were waged for your
town to awaite upon us in the Kings service to Lincolne Feld, and from
thens to Excestre and ayen, and for that season, as we be enfourmed,
thei ar not yet fully contented and paied of their wages; wherfore upon
the sighte herof we woll and charge that ye, with oute any lenger delay,
paie them their hooll duties acording the covenants that ye made with
them, and ye faille not herof as ye entende our pleaser.

Wreten at Wyngefeld, the xxij^th day of Octobr.

  SUFFOLK.

    [Footnote 86-1: [From Fenn, iv. 448.] The battle here referred to
    as ‘Lincoln Field’ is what is commonly called the battle of
    Stamford, in which the insurrection of Sir Robert Welles in
    Lincolnshire was completely defeated in March 1470. Just before
    the date of this document, Edward IV. had left the kingdom, and
    Henry VI. had been restored; but perhaps Suffolk was not aware of
    the situation, or did not recognise it.]


761

MARGARET PASTON TO [JOHN PASTON][86-2]

[Sidenote: 1470 / OCT. 28]

I grete you wele and send you Goddis blyssyng and myn, and I sende you
be the berere herof all the sylver vessell that your graundam[86-3]
makyth so mych of, which she seid I had of myn husband, and myn husband
shuld have had it of his fader. And wher as she seid that I shuld have
had a garneys, I had ner see never more than I send you, that is to say,
ij. plateris, vj. dysshes and vj. sawceris. The ij. playteris weyn
xliij. unces di., and the vj. dysshes weyn lxxiiij. unces di. and the
sawcers weyn xvij. unces j. quarter. And I marvayll that ye sent me not
word what an unce of sylver is werth at London; for it had be lesse
joparte to have sold it here and have sent you the money than the plate.
I myght have sold it her for iij_s._ an unce, sum xx_li._ iiij_s._
iij_d._ Be ware how that ye spend it, but in acquityng you ageyn such as
ye be in daunger to, or abought the good speed of your materis; for, but
if ye take odere heed to your expensis, ye shall do your self and your
frendis gret diswurchep and enpoveryssh so them that non of us shall
help other, to owr elmys [_enemies’_] grete comfort. It is understand
ryght now in this countre be such as cleyme to be frendly to you in what
grete daunger and nede ye stande in, bothe to diverse of your frendis
and to your elmyse. And also it is noysed that I have departed so
largely with you that I may nowthere help yow, my self nor none of my
frendis; which is no wurchep, and causeth me to set the lesse be us; and
at this tyme it compellith me to breke up howshold and to sogeorn; which
I am right loth to have to do if I myght otherwyse have chosyn; for it
caused gret clamour in this town[87-1] that I shall do so; and it shuld
not have neded if I had restreyned whan I myght. Therfore for Goddis
sake take hede here to, and be ware from hens forth; for I have
delivered and sent you bothyn my parte the dedis and yowris, and not
restreyned nowthere for my self nor the dede. Where fore I thynk we
spede and fare all the wers; for it is a fowle slaunder that he was so
wurchepful beried and his qwethword not performed, and so litill do for
hym sithen. And now though I wold do for hym, I have right not
[_naught_] beside my lyffelode that I may make any chevysans with, with
ought grete slaunder; and my lyffelode encreasith evill, for I am fayn
to takyn Mautby in myn owyn hand, and to set up husbandry ther; and how
it shall profite me God knowyth. The fermour owyth me lxxx_li._ and
more. Whan I shall have it I wete never. Therfore be never the bolder in
your expenses for any help ye trust to have of me. For I will fro hens
forth bryng my self ought of such daunger as I stand in for your sakes,
and do for the dede and for them that I have my goodis of; for till I do
so, I know for certeyn that I shall fayll grace and displeas God, How
[_who_] have you in His kepyng. Wretyn on Sent Symondis day and Judes in
hast.--Be your Moder.

Item, I send zow ij. sherte clothys, iche of iii. zardis of the fynest
that is in thys towne. I xuld a dohem mad here[88-1] but that xuld a be
to long here [_ere_] ze xuld a had hem. Zour Awnte[88-2] or sum other
good woman wule do her almes up on zow for the makyng of them. I thank
zow for the gowne that ye gave me Halowmesse day I hope [I[88-3]] xole
be wurshuped ther with. At reverence of God, be ware and take hed to
soche thynggis as is wretyn with ynne thys letter. Telle your brother
that the mony is not zet cownyd that I xuld send hym for thersarsenet
(_sic_) and damaske that I spake to hym foor. As for the damaske that
may be forebore tylle the nexte terme, but as for the sarsenet I woold
have yt and yt mythe be, for I goo in my rentis. Late zour
brothere[88-4] see thys letter. As fore your syster[88-5] I can send zow
no good tydyngges of her, God make her a good wooman.

    [Footnote 86-2: [Add. MS. 34,889, f. 206.] This letter was written
    by Margaret Paston to one of her two sons, Sir John or John, at a
    time when they were both together. That was the case in October
    1470, as appears by a letter of the younger brother, written on
    the 12th (No. 759), to the postscript of which this seems to be an
    answer.]

    [Footnote 86-3: Agnes Paston, the judge’s widow.]

    [Footnote 87-1: Norwich.]

    [Footnote 88-1: ‘I xuld a dohem mad here’ = I should have got them
    made here.]

    [Footnote 88-2: Elizabeth, widow of Robert Poynings.]

    [Footnote 88-3: Omitted in MS.]

    [Footnote 88-4: Sir John Paston, if this letter be to the younger
    brother.]

    [Footnote 88-5: Margery Paston, now probably married to Richard
    Calle.]


762

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[88-6]

_To John Paston, Esquyere, in haste._

[Sidenote: 1470 / NOV. 15]

Brother, I comand me to yow, praying yow that thys be yow guydyng, if
other folkys wy[ll] agree to the same, that Mr. Roos, olde Knevett, ye,
and the worshypfullest that wyll do for owr sake, as Arblaster, John
Gyneye, Wodhows, and al other gentelmen that at the daye wyll be in
Norwyche, that ye all holl as on bodye come to geder, that my Lorde of
Oxenforde maye ondrestande that som strenkethethe restyth ther by,
whyche if it be well handely[d] and prove in the handely[ng], I trow
Heydonnes parte woll be but an easy comparyson. Neverthelesse ye than
most ye be war of on [_one_] payn, and that is thys: Heydon wyll of
crafte sende amonge yow per case vj. or mor with harneyse for to
sclandre yowr felawschep, with seyng that they be ryotous peple, and
natt of substance. Requer the gentelmen above wretyn that if any men be
in Norwyche of the contre that ber any suche harneyse, to do them leve
it or any glysteryng byll.

The Meyr and siteseynes of Nowyche wher wonte to have asertayne[89-1] in
harneyse of men of the town to the nombr of ij. or iij. or v.^c., whyche
if they now do in lyke case, those wole owe better wyll to Mr. Roos and
yow than to other folkys; and if it be so that the thowt nat to have non
suche at thys tyme, I thynke the Meyr woll do it at the request of Mr.
Roos and yow, if lak of tyme cawse it not.

Item, be well war of Clopton, for he hathe avysed my Lorde to be all
to gydre rewled by Heydon, in so moche he hathe reportyd that all thyng
and all materys of my Lordes, and in all the contre, scholde guydyd by
Heydon. If Clopton or Hygham or Lowes John be besy, prese in to my Lorde
byfor them, for the be no Suff.[89-2] materys, and tell the raylyng;
prayng them not to cawse my Lorde to owe hys favor for the pleser to
som folkys ther present. For if my Lorde favoryd or theye owther, by
lykelyed my Lorde and they myght lose vj. tyme as many frendes as he
scholde wynn by ther meanes. Also if ye cowde fynde the meanes, Mr. R.
and ye, to cawse [the] Meyr in my Lordes ere to telle hym, thow he
scholde bynde my Lorde to concell, that the love of the contre and syte
restyth on owr syde, and that other folkys be not belovyd, ner nevyr
wer, thys wolde do nonn harme, if it be soo that all thynge go olyver
currant (?); with mor to remembre that ther is owt of that contre that
be nat at Norw. besyde me, that be ryght worshypfull, and as worshypfull
as few be lengyng to Norff., that woll and schall do my Lorde servyse
the rather for my sake and Master Rossys, and the rather if my Lorde
semyth nat moche thynge to Heydon guydyng.

Also, the godely menes wherby ye best can entrete my cosyn Sir W.
Calthorpe at the seyde day, wse them to cawe hym, if itt wyll be, to
come, ye in hys companye, and he in yow in cheff at yow cheff schew, and
Mr. Roos and he in company, latyng my seyde cosyn wete that I tolde hym
ones that I scholde meve hym of a thyng I trostyn scholde be encressyng
bothe to hys honor and well.

I sende yow a lettyr, com to Norwyche by lyklyed to yow on Monday last
past. It come some what the lattre, for I wende have dyed nat longe by
foer it. Also I receyved on from yow by Mr. Blomvyle yister evyn. Tell
my cosyn W. Yelverton that he may not appyr of a whylle in no wyse.
I trow my cosyn hys fadr schall sende hym worde of the same. Do that ye
can secretly that my Lorde be nat hevy Lorde on to hym. It is
undrestande that itt is doon by the craffte of Heydon. He gate hym in to
that offyce to have to be ageyn me, and nowe he sethe that he hathe don
all that he can ageyn me, and now may doo no mor; nowe he wolde remeve
hym. The daye is comen that he fastyd the evyn for, as an holye yonge
monke fastyd mor than all the covent, aftr that for hys holynesse and
fastyng hopyd to be abbott, whyche afterwarde was abbott; than lefte he
hys abstynens, seyng, ‘The daye was come that he fast the evyn for.’

Brother, I pray yow recomand me to my Lord of Oxford gode Lordshyp. And
wher as I told my Lord that I shuld have awayted uppon hys Lordsyp in
Norff., I wold that I myght soo have don lever then a hundred _li._; but
in godefeth thos maters that I told my Lord trewed shold lette me war
not fynyshed tyl yesterday. Wherfor yf that cause, and also syn
Halowmasse every other day myst not hold uppe myn heed, nor yet may, in
semech that sythen the seyd day, in Westminster Halle and in other
place, I have goon with a staffe as a goste, as men sayd, more lyke that
I rose owte of the erth then owte of a fayr laydys bedd; and yet am in
lyke case, savyng I am in gode hope to amende. Wherfor I beshyche hys
Lordshyp to pardon me, and at a nother tyme I shall make dobell amends;
for by my trouth a man cowyd not have hyred me for v. mark with so gode
will to have ryden in to Norff. as to have at thys season ther to have
awaytyd in hys Lordshyp, and also I wold have ben glad for my Lord shold
have knowyn what servys that I myght have don hys Lordshyp in that
contray.

Item, your geer ys send to you, as Thomas Stampes sayth, savyng Mylsents
geer and the shafeson,[91-1] whych I cannot entrete Thomas Stampes to
goo therfor thys iij. or iiij. days, wherfor I knokkyd hym on the
crowne, &c.

Item, loke that ye take hyde that the letter wer not broken or that it
com to your hands, &c. Wryten at London, on Thursday next after Seynt
Erkenwolds Day, &c.

  JOHN PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 88-6: [From Fenn, iv. 450.] From what is said in this
    letter about the Earl of Oxford, it is impossible that it could
    have been written at any other time than during the brief
    restoration of Henry VI., which only lasted from October 1470 till
    April following.]

    [Footnote 89-1: _A certain_, _i.e._ a number.]

    [Footnote 89-2: I retain this word in the abbreviated form in
    which it is printed in Fenn’s literal transcript; the copy in
    modern spelling reads _sufficient_.]

    [Footnote 91-1: _Chevron_, a covering for a horse’s head, made of
    iron and leather.]

  [[if it be soo that all thynge go olyver / currant (?)
  _text has “that that”: corrected from Fenn_
  _“olyver currant” may be the Old French “(avoir) l’olivier courant”
    (to have a favorable wind)_]]


763

ABSTRACT[91-2]

[Sidenote: 1470 / DEC. 6]

[1470] 6 Dec., on paper. Notice in English from the Duke of Norfolk to
Philippe Cosard, William Dux, and other of his servants and tenants in
the counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, to depart out of the manor of
Castre, and all other manors and lands which he bought of Sir W.
Yelverton and other executors of Sir J. Fastolf, as soon as they can
conveniently remove all his stuff and their own which is therein, he
having consented, at the desire of the Archbishop of Canterbury, the
Chancellor of England, and the Bishop of Winchester, to give up the said
manor, etc. Signed by the Duke, ‘Norff.’ Small seal of arms, three lions
passant, in chief, a label of three points, a straw round the seal.

    [Footnote 91-2: The following abstract is taken from Mr. Macray’s
    Report on the Documents in Magdalen College, Oxford, already
    referred to.]


764

ABSTRACT[92-1]

[Sidenote: 1470 / DEC. 11]

1470, 11 Dec., 49 Hen. VI., ‘and of the readepcion of his roiall power
1.’ Release (in English) from John, Duke of Norfolk, to Bishop
Wayneflete, of the manors of Castre, Wyntertone, Baytone, Bastwik, and
Tolthorpe, in Norfolk, and of Caldecote, Burneviles or Burnegyles, in
Suffolk, which had been sold to him by Nicholas, Abbot of Langle, Will.
Yelverton, Knight, Justice, Thomas Howes, clerk, and Will. Worcetre, and
of which the said Yelverton, Howes, and Will. Jenney, as feoffees, with
others, for Sir J. Fastolf, of the said manors, enfeoffed the said Duke
and others by deed, dated 1st. Oct., 8 Edw. IV. [1468], the said Duke
being informed by the Archbishops of York and Canterbury, and by the
said Bishop of Winchester, that the said bargain was made contrary to
the will of the said Sir John Fastolf. Covenants also to deliver up all
evidences concerning the same, specially the said deed of feoffment and
two papers, one with four seals specifying the said bargain, and another
with three seals specifying a license to enter on all Fastolf’s manors
till the bargain be performed. And for this reconveyance the said Bishop
pays to the said Duke 500 marks.

    [Footnote 92-1: This abstract is also taken from Mr. Macray’s
    Report on the Documents in Magdalen College.]


765

ABSTRACT[92-2]

[Sidenote: 1470 / DEC. 24]

1470, 24 Dec., 49 Hen. VI., ‘and of the readepcione of his royall power,
the first.’ Acknowledgment by ‘the highe and myghti Prynce, John, Duke
of Norff.,’ of the receipt of 100 marks from the Bishop of Winchester,
being part of 250 marks which the said Bishop has promised to pay upon
knowledge of the delivery of the manor of Castre, and other lordships
specified in a writing between the said parties, unto the feoffees of
the said Bishop.

    [Footnote 92-2: This abstract is from the same report as the two
    last.]


766

MARGARET PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[93-1]

_To John Paston the yonger, be this delivered in hast._

[Sidenote: 1470(?) / DEC. [28]]

I grete you wele, and send you Godds blyssyng and myn, latyng you wete
that sith ye departed my Cosyn Calthorp sent me a letter, compleyning in
his wrytyng that for asmych as he can not be payd of his tenaunts as he
hat be befor this tyme, he purposith to lesse his howshold, and to leve
the streytlyer. Wharfor he desireth me to purvey for your suster Anne;
he seth she waxeth hygh, and it wer tyme to purvey her a mariage.

I marveyll what causeth hym to write so now; outher she hath displeased
hym, or ell[es] he hath takyn her with diffaught. Therfor I pray you
comune with my Cosyn Clere at London, and wete how he is dysposyd to her
ward, and send me word, for I shall be fayn to send for her, and with me
she shall but lese her tyme, and with ought she wull be the better
occupied she shall oftyn tymes meve me, and put me in gret
inquietenesse. Remembr what labour I had with your suster, therfor do
your parte to help her forth, that may be to your wurchiep and myn.

Item, remembr the bill that I spake to you of, to gete of your brother
of such money as he hath receyvid of me sith your faders disseas. Se
your Unkyll Mautby, if ye may, and send me sume tydyngs as sonee as ye
may. God kepe you.

Wretyn the Fryday next befor Sent Thomas of Caunterbury, in hast.

  By your Moder.

    [Footnote 93-1: [From Fenn, iv. 288.] This letter was probably
    written in or about the year 1470. Anne Paston, the sister of John
    Paston, here mentioned, was married to William Yelverton, a
    grandson of the Judge, in 1474 (Itin. W. Wyrc. 369), and the match
    had been already determined (as will appear in a future letter)
    before June 1472. At the date of this letter she was still staying
    in Calthorpe’s household, into which, after the manner of the
    times, she had been sent for her education; and Calthorpe desiring
    to reduce his establishment, suggested, somewhat earlier than her
    mother anticipated, that it was time to provide a husband for
    her.]


767

ABSTRACT[94-1]

[Sidenote: 1471 / FEB. 12]

Norfolk and Suffolk Deeds, No. 50. ‘John Paston, Knight, binds himself
to performe all appoyntments made betweene him and W. Wanflet, Byshop of
Winton, concerning certayne landes which were Sir John Fastolfes. Feb.
12, Hen. VI. 49.’

    [Footnote 94-1: [From MS. Index in Magd. Coll., Oxford.]]


768

ABSTRACT[94-2]

[Sidenote: 1471 / FEB. 14]

Release by John Beauchamp, Knight, Lord Beauchamp, to John Paston and
Roger Townesend, Esqs., of his interest in the manors of Castre called
Redhams, Vaus, and Bosoms; and in the manors of Begviles in Wyntirton,
Spensers in Heryngby, Reppes in Bastwyk, and a third part of the manor
of Runham; and in all lands called Billes in Stokesby, Cattes in
Haringby, a messuage called Dengayns in Yarmouth, and all lands and
tenements in the hundreds of East Flegge and West Flegge in Norfolk;
which premises Lord Beauchamp lately had in conjunction with Thomas,
Archbishop of Canterbury, William Yelverton, Justice, William Jenney,
Serjeant-at-law, and William Paston, now surviving, and John Radclyff of
Attylburgh, John Paston, Hen. Fylongley, Esqs., Thomas Howes, clerk, and
Thomas Grene, now deceased, of the gift and feoffment of Ralph Boteler,
Knight, Lord Sudeley, Sir William Oldhall, Ric. Waller, Esq., Thos.
West, Esq., William Wangford, and Nich. Girlyngton.

Dated 14th Feb., 49 and 1 Hen. VI.

    [Footnote 94-2: [From a MS. in the Bodleian Library.]]


769

THE EARL OF OXFORD TO THOMAS VERE[94-3]

_To my right dere and welbeloved brother, Thomas Veer._

[Sidenote: 1471 / MARCH 14]

Right dere and welbeloved brother, I command me hertly unto you;
certyfying you that I have receyved your writing, directed now laste
unto me, by my servant William Cooke, by which I understande the
faithfull gwydyng and disposicion of the cuntre, to my gret cumfote and
pleaser; which I dowbte not shall redunde to the grethest presyng and
worship that ever dide till eny cuntre; certyfying you ferdermore that
by Nicheson of your other tydyngs laste send unto me; also thes by Robt.
Porter. I have disposed me with all the power that I can make in Essex
and Suffolk, Cambrygeshire, and other places, to be on Monday next
comyng at Bury, which purpose I intende to observe, with Godds grace,
towards you in to Norffolk, to the assistence of you and the cuntre, in
case Edwarde with his companye had aryved ther, and yete I shall do the
same noughtwithstandyng; for if he aryve northwarde, like as ye wete by
likelyhode he shulde, I caste to folow and porsew hym. And where ye
desire that I shulde send you woorde what disposicion shalbe take in the
cuntre wher ye be, I desire you that ye, by theadvyse of the gentilmen
which ben there, chese iij. or iiij., and send theym to me at Bury on
Monday next; and than I and they, with my Counceyle, shall take a
direccion for the suretie of all that cuntre, by Godds grace; by whome I
shall send than to you relacion, wheder ye shall remayne still ther your
selff, or resorte to me with all thos that be accompanyed with you. And
Jhesu preserve you. At Hithingham [_Hedingham_], the xiiij. day of
Marche.

  By your lovyng brothyr,

  OXYNFORD.

    [Footnote 94-3: [From Fenn, ii. 54.] It is sufficiently apparent
    from the contents that this was written during the restoration of
    Henry VI., and in anticipation of the attempt by King Edward,
    which was very soon afterwards successful, to recover his throne.
    Edward in fact landed at Ravenspur the very day this letter was
    written.]


770

THE EARL OF OXFORD TO HENRY SPILMAN AND OTHERS[95-1]

_To my right trusty and welbelovyd Henry Spilman, Thos. Seyve, John
Seyve, James Radclif, John Brampton the older, and to eche of them._

[Sidenote: 1471 / MARCH 19]

Trusty and welbeloved, I comende me to you, lettyng you witte that I
have credible tydyngs that the Kyngs gret enemys and rebellis,
acompanyed with enemys estraungers, be nowe aryved, and landyd in the
north parties of this his land, to the utter destruction of his roiall
persone, and subversion of all his realm, if they myght atayne; whom to
encountre and resiste the Kings Highnesse hath comaunded and assigned
me, under his seall, sufficient power and auctorite to call, reyse,
gader, and assemble, fro tyme to tyme, all his liege people of the shire
of Norff., and other places, to assiste, ayde, and strenght me in the
same entent.

Wherfor, in the Kyngs name, and by auctorite aforesaid, I straitly
charge and command you, and in my owne byhalf hertly desire and pray
you, that, all excuses leid apart, ye, and eche of you in your owne
persones defensibly araied, with asmony men as ye may goodly make, be on
Fryday next comyng at Lynne, and so forth to Newark, where, with the
leve of God, I shall not faile to be at that tyme; entendyng fro thence
to goo foorth with the help of God, you, and my fryndes, to the recountr
of the said enemyes; and that ye faill not hereof, as ye tendre the
weele of our said sovereygne Lord, and all this his realme. Written at
Bury, the xix^th day of Marche.

  OXYNFORD.

    [Footnote 95-1: [From Fenn, ii. 58.] This letter was evidently
    written five days after the last.]


771

JAMES GRESHAM TO SIR JOHN PASTON[96-1]

_To the right worshipfull and speciall singler maister, Sir John Paston,
Knyght, be this delyvered._

[Sidenote: 1471]

After due recomendacion hadde with all my service, &c.  .  .  .
.  .  .[96-2]

As for tydyngs, here in this cuntre be many tales, and non accorth with
other. It is tolde me by the Undirshireve that my Lord of Clarence is
goon to his brother, late Kyng; in so moche that his men have the
Gorget[96-3] on their breests, and the Rose over it. And it is seid that
the Lord Howard hath proclamed Kyng E. Kyng of Inglond in Suff., &c.

  Yours, and at your comandement,

  JAMES GRESHAM.

    [Footnote 96-1: [From Fenn, ii. 60.] The political news in this
    letter show that it was written after the landing of Edward IV. in
    Yorkshire.]

    [Footnote 96-2: ‘Here,’ according to Fenn, ‘follow copies of
    indictments and appeals procured against Sir John Paston and his
    servants; and likewise other law business.’ The indictments and
    appeals in question are doubtless those referred to in the next
    No.]

    [Footnote 96-3: A collar worn round the neck.--F.]


772

ABSTRACT[97-1]

A Register of Writs, etc., which was probably sent with the preceding
letter. It is addressed on the back, ‘To Sir John Paston,’ and endorsed
‘James Gresham.’

   *   *   *

_Distringas_ against Sir John Paston, late of Castre, for his appearance
in the King’s Bench, Easter, 8 Edw. IV. ‘Per Contr. de Anno viij^o E.
iiij^{ti}. Ro. xxviij.[97-2] Vynter.’

_Distringas_ against Sir John Paston and Ric. Calle, late of Castre,
with _capias_ against William Wykes, late of Castre; Edmund Brome, late
of Redeham; and John Dawebeney, late of Castre; Thurstan Cokesson,
_alias_ Starky, late of Castre; John Pampyng, late of Castre; and Henry
Swete, late of Castre, yeoman, for their appearance in the King’s Bench
in Easter to answer for offences against the statute _de ingressibus
manu forti_. ‘Per Contr’ de Anno viij^o E. iiij^{ti}. Ro. xxviij.
Vynter.’

‘Of these ij. writtes ar _supersedeas_ delyvered to the Undirshirreve.’

Writ of exigent against John Pampyng, late of Castre, gent., and Edmund
Brome of Castre, gent., ‘Oct’ Joh’is,’ appealed by Cecilia, widow of
John Colman, as principals in the death of her husband. Ro. 67. ‘Breve
istud deliberatur de recordo, Hill. xlix. Sonde.’

Another writ of exigent against Pampyng and Brome at the King’s suit for
divers felonies and murders. ‘Ro. xvj. Per Contr’ de Anno x^o E.
iiij^{ti}. Ro. xij^o Vynter.’

_Distringas_ against Sir John Paston and Ric. Calle for their appearance
in the King’s Bench in Easter term, on an indictment for forcible entry.
‘Per Contr’ de Anno viij^o E. iiij^{ti}. Ro. xxix.’

_Distringas_ against Sir John Paston and Ric. Calle, with _capias_
against John Wykes, late of Castre, Edmund Brome, John Dawebeney, and
Thurstan Cokesson, _alias_ Starky, late of Castre, for their appearance
in the King’s Bench in Easter term, on an indictment of forcible entry.
‘Per Contr’ de Anno viij. E. iiij^ti. Ro. xxviij. Vynter.’

_Distringas_ against Sir John Paston and Ric. Calle, with _capias_
against John Wykes, Edmund Brome, John Dawebeney, and Thurstan, etc.,
for Easter. ‘Per Contr. de Anno viij. Ro. xxviij. Vynter.’

_Capias_ against John Pampyng, late of Castre, Edmund Brome, late of
Redeham, William Bedford and Edmund Mason, late of Bychamwelle, laborer,
and Alex. Cok of Norwich, yeoman, ‘xv. Pasch.,’ appealed by Christiana,
widow of Thos. Mylys, in Easter term, as principals in the death of her
husband. Also _capias_ against William Paston of Norwich and Ralph
Lovell of Bychamwelle, gent., appealed as accessaries. Ro. lxix.
Registrum Sonde.’

  ⁂ All the above writs are for the county of Norfolk.

    [Footnote 97-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]

    [Footnote 97-2: The Controlment Roll 8 Edw. IV. is now missing.]


773

ABSTRACT[98-1]

[Sidenote: 1471 / APRIL 10]

‘30. Relaxatio Johannis Paston facta episc. Winton, et aliis totius
juris in maneriis vocat. Akethorp in Leyestoft, Spitlings in Gorleston,
Habland in Bradwell, etc., quæ quondam fuerunt Johannis Fastolf.--April
10, Edw. IV. 11.’

    [Footnote 98-1: This is another entry from the old index of deeds
    in Magdalen College, Oxford. There is probably some slight error
    in the date, as Edward IV. was not acknowledged as King on the
    10th April, in what would otherwise have been the eleventh year of
    his reign. He was so acknowledged a few days later--_i.e._ after
    the battle of Barnet, which was fought on the 14th April--so that
    if the date had been, say, April 20, instead of April 10, it would
    have been quite consistent. It is impossible, however, to say
    where the error lies, so we place the document under the date
    actually expressed in it.]




THE PASTON LETTERS

_Edward IV._




774

SIR JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[99-1]

_To my Moodre._

[Sidenote: 1471 / APRIL 18]

Moodre, I recomande me to yow, letyng yow wette that, blyssed be God, my
brother John is a lyffe and farethe well, and in no perell off dethe.
Never the lesse he is hurt with an arow on hys ryght arme, be nethe the
elbow; and I have sent hym a serjon, whyche hathe dressid hym, and he
tellythe me that he trustythe that he schall be all holl with in ryght
schort tyme. It is so that John Mylsent is ded, God have mercy on hys
sowle! and Wylliam Mylsent is on lyffe, and hys other servants all be
askepyd by all lyklihod.

Item, as ffor me, I ame in good case, blyssyd be God; and in no joparte
off my lyffe, as me lyst my self; for I am at my lyberte iff nede bee.

Item, my Lorde Archebysshop[99-2] is in the Towr; neverthelesse I trust
to God that he schall do well i noghe; he hathe a saffe garde for hym
and me bothe. Neverthelesse we have ben troblyd syns, but nowe I
undrestande that he hathe a pardon; and so we hope well.

Ther was kyllyd uppon the ffelde, halffe a myle ffrom Bernett, on
Esterne Daye, the Erle of Warwyk, the Marqweys Montacu, Sir William
Terrell,[100-1] Sir Lewes Johns, and dyverse other Esquiers off owr
contre, Godmerston and Bothe.

And on the Kynge Edwardes partye, the Lord Cromwell,[100-2] the Lord
Saye,[100-3] Sir Omffrey Bowghsher[100-4] off owr contre, whyche is a
sore moonyd man her, and other peple off bothe partyes to the nombre off
mor then a m^l.

As for other tythynges, is undrestande her that the Qwyen Margrett is
verrely londyd and hyr sone in the west contre, and I trow that as to
morow, or ellys the next daye, the Kynge Edwarde wyll depart ffrom hense
to hyr warde, to dryve her owt ageyn.

Item, I beseche yow that I may be recomendyd to my cosyn Lomner, and to
thanke hym ffor hys goode wyll to me wardes, iff I had hadde nede, as I
undrestoode by the berer heroff; and I beseche you on my behalve to
advyse hym to be well ware off hys delyng or langage as yit, ffor the
worlde, I ensur yow, is ryght qwesye, as ye schall know with in thys
monthe; the peple heer feerythe it soor.

God hathe schewyd Hym selffe marvelouslye lyke Hym that made all, and
can undoo ageyn whan Hym lyst; and I kan thynke that by all lyklyod
schall schewe Hym sylff as mervylous ageyn, and that in schort tyme;
and, as I suppose, offter than onys in casis lyke.

Item, it is soo that my brother is on purveyed off monye. I have holpyn
hym to my power and above. Wherffor as it pleasythe yow remembre hym,
ffor kan not purveye ffor my selffe in the same case.

Wretyn at London the thorysdaye in Esterne weke. I hope hastely to see
yow.

All thys bylle most be secrett. Be ye not adoghtyd off the worlde, ffor
I trust all schall be well. Iff it thusse contenewe, I ame not all
undon, nor noon off us; and iff otherwyse, then, &c. &c.

    [Footnote 99-1: [From Fenn, ii. 62.] This letter, as shown by the
    contents, was written just four days after the battle of Barnet,
    by which Edward IV. recovered his throne. It is not signed, but
    the writer is Sir John Paston.]

    [Footnote 99-2: George Neville, Archbishop of York. It was from
    the custody of this prelate that Edward escaped, after having been
    surprised and taken prisoner by the Earl of Warwick, in 1470:
    perhaps the kind treatment of his then prisoner now procured his
    pardon.--F.]

    [Footnote 100-1: Sir William Tyrell was cousin to Sir James
    Tyrell, the afterwards supposed murderer of Edward V. and his
    brother the Duke of York.--F.]

    [Footnote 100-2: Humphrey Bourchier, third son of Henry, Earl of
    Essex, had summons to Parliament, in 1461, as Lord Cromwell, in
    right of his wife.--F.]

    [Footnote 100-3: William Fienes, Lord Say.]

    [Footnote 100-4: Son of John, Lord Berners.]


775

[THE EARL OF OXFORD] TO A LADY[101-1]

_To the ryght reverent and wyrchypfull Lady._[101-2]

[Sidenote: 1471]

Ryght reverent and wyrchypfull Lady, I recomande me to yow, lettyng yow
wete that I am in gret hevynes at the makyng of thys letter; but thankyd
be God, I am eschapyd my selfe, and sodenly departyd fro my men; for I
undyrstand my chapleyn wold have detrayed me; and if he com in to the
contre, let hym be mad seuer, &c. Also ye shall gyff credence to the
brynger of thys letter, and I beseke yow to reward hym to hys costs; for
I was not in power at the makyng of thys letter to gyff hym, but as I
wass put in trest by favar of strange pepyll, &c.

Also ye shall send me in all hast all the redi money that ye can make,
and asse mone of my men asse can com well horsyd; and that they cum in
dyverse parcellys. Also that my horsse be sent, with my stele sadelles;
and byd the yoman of the horse cover theym with ledder. Also ye shall
send to my moder,[101-3] and let hyr wete of thys letter, and pray hyr
of hyr blessyng, and byd hyr send me my kasket, by thys tokyn; that she
hathe the key theroff, but it is brokyn.

Also ye shall send to the Pryor of Thetford,[101-4] and byd hym send me
the sum of gold that he seyd that I schuld have. Also sey to hym by thys
token, that I schewyd hym the fyrst Prive Seale, &c. Also lete Pastun,
Fylbryg, Brews, come to me. Also ye shall delyver the brynger of thys
letter an horsse, sadell, and brydell. Also ye schallbe of gud cher, and
take no thowght, for I schall brynge my purpose abowte now by the grace
of God, Qwhome have yow in kepyng.

  O . . . D (?).

    [Footnote 101-1: [From Fenn, ii. 68.] The signature of this letter
    is composed of flourishes which were probably devised on purpose
    to make it unintelligible. Fenn suggests that the first character
    may be taken for an O, and the last for a D; but to our thinking
    the resemblance is rather difficult to trace. There is, however,
    great probability in his conjecture that the writer was the Earl
    of Oxford, and the date just after the battle of Barnet.]

    [Footnote 101-2: Margaret, daughter of Richard Neville, Earl of
    Salisbury, sister to the late Earl of Warwick, and wife of John de
    Vere, Earl of Oxford.--F.]

    [Footnote 101-3: Elizabeth, daughter and heir of Sir John Howard,
    Knight, who was the grandfather of John Howard, first Duke of
    Norfolk of that name. She was now the widow of John de Vere, late
    Earl of Oxford.]

    [Footnote 101-4: John Vescey, Prior of Thetford, from 1441 to
    1479.--F.]


776

JOHN PASTON OF GELSTON TO MARGARET PASTON[102-1]

[Sidenote: 1471 / APRIL 30]

Aftyr humbyll and most dew recomendacyon, in as humbyll wyse as I can,
I beseche you of your blyssyng, preying God to reward you with as myche
plesyer and hertys ease as I have latward causyd you to have trowbyll
and thowght; and, with Godys grace, it shall not be longe to or then my
wronges and othyr menys shall be redressyd, for the world was nevyr so
lyek to be owyrs as it is now; werfor I prey you let Lomnor no be to
besy as yet. Modyr, I beseche you, and ye may spare eny money, that ye
wyll do your almesse on me and send me some in as hasty wyse as is
possybyll; for by my trowthe my leche crafte and fesyk, and rewardys to
them that have kept me and condyt me to London, hathe cost me sythe
Estern Day[102-2] more than v_li._, and now I haue neythyr met, drynk,
clothys, lechecraft, ner money but up on borowyng; and I have asayid my
frendys so ferre, that they be gyn to fayle now in my gretest ned that
evyr I was in. Also, modyr, I beseche yow, and my horse that was at
lechecraft at the Holt[102-3] be not takyn up for the Kynges
hawkys,[102-4] that he may be had hom and kept in your plase, and not to
go owght to watyr, nor no whedyr ellys, but that the gat be shet, and he
to be chasyd aftyr watyr within your plase, and that he have as myche
met as he may ete; I have hey i new of myn owne, and as for otys, Dollys
will purvey for hym, or who that dothe it I wyll paye. And I beseche yow
that he have every wek iij. boshell of otys, and every day a penyworthe
of bred; and if Botoner be not at Norwyche, and Syme kep hym, I shall
geve hym well for hys labore. Also that Phelypp Loveday put the othyr
horse to gresse ther, as he and I wer acordyd.

Item, that Botoner send me hyddyr the two shyrtys that wer in my casket,
and that he send me hydyr xl_s._ by the next messenger that comyth to
London.

Item, that Mastress Broom send me hedyr iij. longe gownys and ij.
doblettes, and a jaket of plonket chamlett, and a morey bonet out of my
cofyr. Sir Jamys hathe the key, as I sent hyr werd be for thys.

Item, that syche othyr wryghtynges and stuff as was in my kasket be in
your kepyng, and that no body look my wryghtynges.

Item, that the horse that Purdy hathe of myne be put to some good gresse
in haste; and if it plese yow to have knowlage of our royal person,
I thank God I am hole of my syknesse, and trust to be clene hole of all
my hurttys within a sevennyght at the ferthest, by wyche tym I trust to
have othyr tydynges; and those tydynges onys had, I trust not to be
longe owght of Norffolk, with Godys grace, Whom I beseche preserve you
and your for my part.

Wretyn the last day of Apryll. The berer herof can tell you tydynges,
syche as be trew for very serteyn.

  Your humbylest servaunt,

  J. OF GELSTON.

    [Footnote 102-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter was printed
    by Fenn in his fifth volume, of which the original MSS. are now
    recovered. It was evidently written in April 1471, when the writer
    was recovering from the wound he had received at the battle of
    Barnet (_see_ No. 774). It is not addressed, but is endorsed in a
    later hand, ‘Litera Johannis Paston armigeri matri suæ.’]

    [Footnote 102-2: The battle of Barnet was fought on Easter Day,
    14th April 1471.]

    [Footnote 102-3: A pasture so called, and means the groves, or
    lands full of wood.--F.]

    [Footnote 102-4: This may signify, in jocular language, if he be
    not dead.--F.]

  [[Footnote 102-1
  ... (_see_ No. 774).
  _closing parenthesis missing_]]


777

THE BATTLE OF TEWKESBURY[104-1]

_Ded in the Feld._

[Sidenote: 1471 / MAY 4]

  Edward that was called Prynce.
  Lord John of Somerset.
  Erle of Devenshire.
  Lord Wenlok.
  Sir William Vaus.
  Sir Edmond Hamden.
  Sir John Seymour.
  Sir William Bermoth.
  Water Barrow.
  Mr. William Henmar.
  Mr. Feldyng.[104-2]
      Hervy, recorder.[104-3]
  Mr. Herry, capteyn of Brystowe.
  Sir Roberte Whetyngham.
      Knoyll.

_Thes be men that were heveded._[104-4]

  The Duke of Somerset.
  The Lord of Sent Jones.[104-5]
  Sir Jerveys Clyfton.
  Humfrey Awdeley.
  Lowes Miles.
  Forey of Fraunce.
  Sir John Delvys.[104-6]
  Lord Foskew on lyffe.
  Sir William Carre.
  Sir Hew Courteney.
  Sir Thomas Tressham.
  Sir Herry Tressham.
  Sir William Newbery.
  Mr. Gower.[105-1]
  Mr. Awdeley.[105-2]
  Robert Clerke.
  Lechefeld, mason of Westmynster.
  Sir William Grymesby yet on lyffe.

_Thes be the Knyghtes that the Kyng mad in the Feld._

  Lord Cobham.
  Sir George Nevel.
  Sir Philip Courtenay.
  Sir Herry Bemonde.
  Sir Moreys of Barkley.
  Sir Richard Hastynges.
  Sir Roberte Haryngton.
  Sir Thomas Gray.
  Sir James Terell.
  Sir John Feres.
  Sir Herry Feres.
  Sir Herry Purpeynt.
  Sir John Parre.
  Sir John Downe.
  Sir Roger Kyngstone.
  Sir John Crokere.
  Sir ---- Skerne.
  Sir James Crowmere.
  Sir William Sandalle.
  Sir John Deverys.
  Sir Herry Grey.
  Sir Edward Wodehous.
  Sir Richard Croft.
  Sir John Pylkyngton.
  Sir John Byngham.
  Sir John Harley.
  Sir John Boteler.
  Sir Christofer Morysby.
  Sir John Clay.
  Sir Robert Wylleby.
  Sir Robert Grene.
  Sir Roger Ree.
  Sir Richard Radclyffe.
  Sir John Saundes.
  Sir Thomas Strikelande.
  Sir George Browne.
  Sir William Motton.
  Sir Tery Robsert.
  Sir Thomas Cromewell.
  Sir Robert Corbet.
  Sir Nicholas Langford.
  Sir John Seyntlowe.
  Sir William Brandon.

    [Footnote 104-1: [From MS. Phillipps 9735, No. 279.] This paper is
    in a contemporary handwriting, and undoubtedly refers to the
    battle of Tewkesbury.]

    [Footnote 104-2: Sir William Fielding, according to Warkworth’s
    Chronicle.]

    [Footnote 104-3: These words, ‘Hervy, recorder,’ are written over
    ‘Herry, capteyn,’ as a correction; but the latter are not erased.
    Warkworth mentions Sir Nicholas Hervy.]

    [Footnote 104-4: Beheaded.]

    [Footnote 104-5: Sir John Longstruther, Prior of St. John’s.]

    [Footnote 104-6: Originally written ‘Mr. Delvys,’ and corrected.]

    [Footnote 105-1: James Gower, according to Warkworth.]

    [Footnote 105-2: Sir Humphrey Audeley.]


778

JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[106-1]

[Sidenote: 1471 / JULY 5]

Most worchepfull and my ryght specyall good modyr, as humbylly as I can,
I recomand me on to yow, besechyng yow of your blyssyng. Please it yow
to undyrstand that thys day I spake with Batcheler Water, whiche let me
have undyrstandyng of your welfare, wherof I thank God with all my hert.
Also he leet me have knowlage that the Lord Scalys had grauntyd yow to
be my good lord, wherof I am no thyng prowd, for he may do leest with
the gret mastyr; but he wold depert ovyr the see, as hastyly as he may;
and because he wenyth that I wold go with hym, as I had promyseyd evyr,
and he had kept foorthe hys jornay at that tyme, thys is the cause that
he wyll be my good lord and help to get my pardon. The Kyng is not best
pleasyd with hym for that he desyerthe to depert, in so myche that the
Kyng hathe seyd of hym, that wen evyr he hathe most to do, then the Lord
Scalys wyll sonest axe leve to depert, and weenyth that it is most be
cause of kowardyese. As for pardon, I can never get, withowght I schold
paye to myche money for it, and I am not so purveyd. As for Herry
Hallman, my brodyr wyll axe hym no sylver tyll ye be payeyd; therfor ye
may send to hym and have it.

Item, I am sory that ye have fadyrd my hors that was at Caster to be my
Brodyr Edmundys, for I had leveer that they had hym style then owght
ellys; wherfor thow they profyr hym yow from hense foorthe, let not my
brodyr Edmund take hym, but let him sey whedyr they wyll let hym have
hym or not, that I have promyseyd my brodyr Edmund a bettyr hors for
hym, so that he wyll not cleyme the same for hys. As for tydyngs her be
non but that the Scottys and Walyshe men be besy; what they meane I can
not seye. My cosyn John Loveday can tell yow, and ther be eny odyr
flyeyng talys, for he hathe walkyd in London, and so do not I. When I
may I wyll come hom with Godys grace, whom I beseche to sende you your
hertys desyeyr. Wretyn the v. daye of Julle.

  Be yowr humblest sone and servant,

  J. P.

    [Footnote 106-1: [From Fenn, iv. 116.] From the mention of Lord
    Scales in this letter it might be supposed that it was written not
    later than the year 1469, when Anthony Woodville, the last Lord
    Scales, became Earl Rivers by the death of his father; but I
    believe the date to be 1471, and that the writer is simply
    speaking of Earl Rivers by his old title. In the first place there
    is no appearance of either of the John Pastons requiring a royal
    pardon before the year 1471; secondly, it is not probable that
    either of them would have spoken so slightingly of the value of
    Lord Scales’s intercession at an earlier period; and thirdly, it
    seems doubtful whether Edmund Paston could have been old enough to
    own a war-horse many years before. Finally, we find by Letter 780
    following that John Paston, the youngest, succeeded in obtaining a
    pardon signed by the King on the 17th July 1471. If the reference
    to the autograph plate in Fenn is correct, this letter was in the
    hand of his elder brother, Sir John Paston, Knight; but as it is
    not signed, like most of his letters, ‘John Paston, K.,’ we are
    inclined to suspect that it was really written by the younger
    brother, like No. 780.]


779

ABSTRACT[107-1]

[Sidenote: 1471 / JULY 12]

Norff. and Suff. Deeds, No. 5. ‘Relaxatio Johannis Paston militis,
Davidi Husband et Will. Gyfford totius juris in maneriis de Saxthorp,
Tichwell, Haineford, Essex in Hickling, etc., Calcote, Leystoft,
Habland, Broweston, Gorleston alias Spitlings, quæ quondam fuerunt
Johannis Fastolf mil., et quæ Will. Waynflet episcopus Winton’ habuit ex
dono Rad. Boteler domini de Sudley, et prædicti David et Willielmus ex
dono episc. prædicti, necnon de et in 25 _markes redd._ precipiend. de
priori de Hickling. Julii 12, Edw. IV. 11. With a scedule annexed
touching the same release.’

    [Footnote 107-1: [From MS. Index in Magd. Coll., Oxford.]]


780

JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[107-2]

_To my most worchepfull Modyr, Margaret Paston, be thys delyveryd in
hast._

[Sidenote: 1471 / JULY 17]

Ryght worchepfull modyr, I recomand me to yow, and as lowly as I can,
I beseche yow of yowr blyssyng. Please yow to undyrstand that thys
Wednysday Sir Thomas Wyngffeld sent to me, and let me wet that the Kyng
had syngnyd my bylle of perdon, whyche the seid Sir Thomas delyveryd me;
and so by Fryday, at the forthest, I tryst to have my perdon ensealyd by
the Chanceler, and soone aftyr, so as I can fornyshe me, I tryst to se
yow, if so be that eny of the Kynges hows com in to Norwyche. I wold
fayne my gray horse wer kept in mewe for gnattys. Also, modyr, I beseche
yow that Dollys and his felawe may be sent to, that I may have my money
redy ayenst that I come home, whyche is dew to be payid, for thys mater
hathe cost me the settyng over. Also that it may please yow that Purdy
at Heylysdon maye be sent to for the horse that he hathe of myne, and
that the horse may be kept well, and have as myche mete as he wyll eate
be twyx thys and that I come home, and that Jakys nage have mete i now
also. Also, and Syr Thomas Wyngfeld come to Norwyche, that he may have
as good chere as it please yow to make on to that man that I am most
behold to for hys gret kyndnesse and good wyll, for he takyth full my
part ayenst my gretest enmyeys, Brandons and hys brodyr William; for at
my fyrst comyng to Sir Thomas Wyngfeld, bothe William Wyngfeld and
William Brandon the yonger wer with Sir Thomas, and had gret wordys to
myn owne mowthe, and in cheff W. Wyngfeld; and wher so evyr he may met
me on evyn grownd he wyll do myche; but and we met evynly, no fors, so I
have yowr blyssyng. I prey yow, with owght it be to my Lady Calthorp,
let ther be but fewe woordys of thys perdon. No more, but I prey God
preserve yow and yours.

Wretyn the Wednysday next before Mary Mawdelen,

  By your humblest sone,

  J. P.

    [Footnote 107-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter refers to a
    pardon granted by the King to John Paston the younger, for having
    taken part with the Lancastrians at the battle of Barnet. Though
    the ‘bill’ for this pardon was signed by the King on the 17th
    July, the pardon itself did not pass the Great Seal till the 7th
    February following, under which date it is enrolled on the Pardon
    Roll of 11 Edw. IV., memb. 9.]


781

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[109-1]

_To Mestresse Margret Paston, or to John Paston, Esqier, hyr sone, in
hast._

[Sidenote: 1471 / SEPT. 15]

Ryght well belovyd brother, I comende me to yow, letyng yow wete that I
am in wellffar, I thanke God, and have ben evyr syns that I spake last
with yow; and mervayle for that ye sent never wryghtynge to me syns ye
departyd; I herde nevyr synes that tyme any worde out off Norffolk; ye
myght aft Bertlemai Feyr[109-2] have had messengers i nowe to London,
and iff ye had sent to Wykys, he scholde have conveyed it to me. I herde
yisterdaye, that a Worsted man of Norffolk, that solde worstedys[109-3]
at Wynchester, seyde that my Lord of Norffolk and my Lady wer on
pylgrymage at Our Lady[109-4] on ffoot, and so they went to Caster; and
that at Norwyche on scholde have had large langage to yow, and callyd
yow traytor, and pyked many quarellys to yow. Sende me worde ther off;
it wer well doo, that ye wer a lytell sewrer off yowr pardon than ye be:
avyse you, I deme ye woll her afftr ellys repent yow.

I undrestonde that Bastarde Fauconbryge[109-5] is owther hedyd or lyke
to be, and hys brother bothe; some men seye he wolde have deservyd it,
and som sey naye.

I purpose to be att London the ffyrst daye off the terme; send me worde
whethyr ye schall be ther or nott.

Item, I wolde wete whether ye have spoken wyth my Lady off Norffolk or
not, and off hyr disposicion and the howsoldys to me and to yow wardes,
and whether it be a possible to have Caster ageyn and ther goodewylles
or not; and also I praye yow undrestande what ffelaschyp and guydyng is
in Caster, and have a spye resortyng in and owt, so maye ye know the
secretys among them. Ther is moche adoo in the Northe, as men seyn;
I pray yow be ware off yowr guydyng, and in cheff off yowr langage, and
so that ffro hense fforthe by yowr langage noo man perceyve that ye
ffavor any person contrary to the Kynges plesur. I undrestonde that the
Lord Ryvers hathe lycence off the Kynge to goo to Portyngale now within
thys vij. nyght. I pray yow recomande me to my modre, and beseche hyr
off hyr blyssyng on my be halve.[110-1]

Item, I praye yow sende me worde iff any off owr ffrendys or wellwyllers
be dede, ffor I feer that ther is grete dethe in Norwyche, and in other
Borowgh townese in Norffolk, ffor I ensur you it is the most unyversall
dethe that evyr I wyst in Ingelonde; ffor by my trowthe, I kan not her
by pylgrymes that passe the contre, nor noon other man that rydethe or
gothe any contre, that any Borow town in Ingelonde is ffree ffrom that
sykenesse; God sease it whan it pleasyt Hym. Wherffor, ffor Goddysake,
let my moodre take heede to my yonge brytheren that they be not in noon
place wher that sykenesse is regnyng, nor that they dysport not with
noon other yonge peple whyche resortythe wher any sykenesse is, and iff
ther be any off that sykenesse ded or enffect in Norwyche, ffor Goddes
sake, lete hyr sende them to som ffrende off hyrse in to the contre, and
do ye the same by myn advyce; late my moodre rather remeve hyr
howsesolde in to the contre.

Even now Thyrston browt me word ffro London that it was Doctor Aleyn
that cawsyd yowr troble that ye had at Norwych; and that John Pampyng
roode ffor a dyscharge ffor yow, and that he hathe sped well, but
howghe, that wot I nott; iff ye be cleer owt off Doctor Aleyn danger,
kepe yow ther, and her afftr ye maye schoffe as well at hys carte.
I praye yow sende me worde off all the fforme off hys delyng with yow.

I had almost spoke with Mestresse Ann Hault, but I dyd not;
nevyrthelesse thys next terme I hope to take on weye with hyr or other;
sche is agreyd to speke with me, and sche hopythe to doo me ease as sche
saythe.

I praye yow sende me worde hoghe ye doo with my Lady Elysabeth
Boghscher; ye have a lytell chaffyd it, but I can not tell howe; sende
me worde whether ye be in better hope or werse. I her seye that the Erle
off Oxenffordys bretheryn be goon owt off Sceyntewarye. Sir Thomas
Fulfforthe[111-1] is goon owt off Sceyntewarye, and a gret ffelaschyp
ffettchyd hym, a iij.^xx., and they sey that with in v. myle off London
he was CC. men; and no man watethe wher he is become not yit.

The Lordes Hastyngs and Howerd be in Caleys, and have it pesebely; and
Sir Walter Wrettesle and Sir Jeffrey Gate be comyn thense, and woll be
at London thys daye as it is seyde.

Wretyn at Waltham besyd Winchester the daye nex Holy Roode Daye.[111-2]

  J. P., K.

    [Footnote 109-1: [From Fenn, ii. 72.] Apart from the reference to
    John Paston’s pardon, the date of this letter is fixed by what is
    said of the bastard Falconbridge.]

    [Footnote 109-2: Bartholomew Fair, in Smithfield.]

    [Footnote 109-3: Worsted, in Norfolk, a town formerly famous for
    the spinning of the fine thread with which the yarn called Worsted
    is made.--F.]

    [Footnote 109-4: Of Walsingham.]

    [Footnote 109-5: Thomas Nevill, a natural son of William, Lord
    Fauconberg. He was beheaded in 1471, and, as mentioned in Letter
    782 following, his head was placed on London Bridge.]

    [Footnote 110-1: Here follow, says Fenn, some directions about
    payments of money.]

    [Footnote 111-1: Sir Thomas Fulford was son of Sir Baldwin
    Fulford, beheaded at Bristol in 1461; he likewise ended his life
    on the scaffold.]

    [Footnote 111-2: Holyrood Day, 14th of September.]

  [[I pray yow recomande me to my modre
  _text has “recomande mo”: corrected from Fenn_]]


782

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[111-3]

_To hys well belovyd John Paston, Esquier, at Norwyche, or to Mestresse
Margret, his Modre._

[Sidenote: 1471 / SEPT. 28]

I comande me to yow, letyng yow weet that, &c.[111-4]

I wolde ffayne have the mesur wher my ffadre lythe at Bromholm; bothe
the thyknesse and compase off the peler at hys hed, and ffrom that the
space to the alter, and the thyknesse off that alter, and imagery off
tymbre werk; and what hyght the arche is to the grounde off the ilde,
and how hye the grounde off the qwyr is hyer than the grownde off the
ilde.

Item, I praye yowe late the mesur by pekthred be taken or elt mesured by
yerde, how moche is ffrom the northe gate, ther the brygge was, at
Gressham to the sowthewall, and in lyke fforme ffrom the este syde to
the west, also the hyght off the estewall, and the hyght of the sowthest
towr ffrom the grownde, iff ye maye easely. Also what bredde every towr
is within the wall, and whych towr is moor then other within.

Alsso how manye ffote, or what brede eche towr takythe within iche
corner off the quadrate[112-1] ovyrthwert the dorys, and how many
taylors yards is from the moote syde, wher the brygg was, to the hyghe
weye, or to the heddge all a longe the entre, and what brede the entre
is be twyen the dykys. I praye yow, iff ye have a leyser in any wyse, se
thys doone yowrselffe iff ye maye; or ellys iff Pampyng do it, or who
that ye thynke can doo it, I wolle spende xx_d._ or as ye seme to have
the sertayn off every thyng her in. And as for my ffaders tombe,
I charge yow se it yowr selffe, and when I speke with yow I woll tell
yow the cawses why that I desyr thys to be doon.

As ffor tydyngs, the Kyng, and the Qwyen, and moche other pepell, ar
ryden and goon to Canterbery, nevyr so moche peple seyn in Pylgrymage
hertofor at ones, as men seye.

Alsso it is seyde that the Erle of Penbroke[112-2] is taken on to
Brettayn; and men saye that the Kynge schall have delyvere off hym
hastely, and som seye that the Kynge off France woll se hym saffe, and
schall sett hym at lyberte ageyn.

Item, Thomas Fauconbrydge hys hed was yesterdaye sett uppon London
Brydge, lokyng into Kent warde; and men seye that hys brother was sor
hurte, and scope to seyntwarye [_sanctuary_] to Beverle.

Sir Thomas Fulfforthe escaped owt of Westminster with an C. sperys, as
men seye, and is in to Devenshyr; and ther he hathe strekyn off Sir John
Crokkers hed, and kylt an other knyght off the Corteneys, as men seye.
I wolde ye hadd yowr verry pardon at onys; wherfor I praye yow ffayle
not to be at London within iiij. daye afftr Seynt Feythe;[113-1] ye
schall do goode in many thynges, and I praye yow sende me worde heroff
by the next massenger; and if it come to Mestresse Elysabeth Hyggens, at
the Blak Swan, sche schall conveye it to me, ffor I woll not ffayle to
be ther at London ageyn within thys vj. dayes.

Mestresse Elysabeth hathe a son, and was delyveryd within ij. dayes
afftr Seynt Bertelmew;[113-2] and hyr dowtr A. H. was the next daye
afftr delyveryd off an other sone, as sche seythe, xj. weks er hyr tyme;
it was crystened John, and is ded. God save all! No mor tyll I speke
with yow.

Wretyn at London on Mychellmesse Evyn.

  J. P., K.

Item, I praye yow late some wytty felaw, or ellys yowrselff, goo to the
townes ther as thes ij. women dwelle, and inquire whether they be maryed
syns and ageyn or not, ffor I holde the hoorys weddyd; and iff they be,
than the appelys wer abbatyd ther by. I remembr not ther names; ye knowe
them better then I. Alsso in the Schreffvys bookys ther maye ye ffynde
off them.

    [Footnote 111-3: [From Fenn, ii. 80.] The evidences of date in
    this letter are the same as in the last.]

    [Footnote 111-4: Here follows an account that the Duchess of
    Suffolk and Duke of Norfolk intend again commencing appeals
    against Sir John Paston and his brother, etc., concerning Caister,
    etc.--F.]

    [Footnote 112-1: A drawing is here given in the original letter,
    apparently designed as a plan of the quadrangle of Gresham, of
    which the subjoined is a facsimile.

      [Illustration]]

    [Footnote 112-2: Jasper Tudor.]

    [Footnote 113-1: 5th of October.]

    [Footnote 113-2: 24th of August.]


783

R. L. TO JOHN PASTON[114-1]

_To hys worshipful master, John Paston, Esquier._

[Sidenote: 1471 / OCT. 21]

Ryght wurchupfull ser, I comaund me to your good maysterchepe, &c. Plese
it you to understond that Redford desyryd me on your byhalfe that I
chuld goo and comon with the woman that was the fullars wyfe of South
Walsham, whech woman is now maryed to on Thom Styward, dwellyng in the
parysch of Seynt Gyll in Norwych, whech woman seyd to me that che sewyd
never the pele, but that she was by sotyle craft brought to the New In
at Norwych, and ther was Maystir Southwell, and he entretyd hyr to be my
Lords wewe [_widow_],[114-2] by the space of an hole yer next folwyn,
and therto he mad hyr to be bowne in an obligacyon. And whan that yer
was past he desyred hyr to be my Lords wedow another yer; and than she
seyd that she had lever lose that that she had do, than to lose that and
meer; and therfor she seyd pleynly that she wold no mor of that mater.
And so she toke hyr an husbond, whech is the seyd Thom Styward; and she
seyth that it was full sor ageyn hyr wylle that ever the mater went so
forforth, for she had never non avayle therof, butt it was sewyd to hyr
gret labor and losse, for she had never of my Lords councell, but berely
hyr costs to London. No mor, but God have you in Hys kepyng.

Wretyn at Norwych, the Monday next after the Fest of Seynt Luke.

  By your servant,

  R. L.

    [Footnote 114-1: [From Fenn, iv. 440.] In the postscript to the
    preceding letter, Sir John Paston intimates his belief that the
    two widows who had appealed his brother of the murder of their
    husbands had married again, and that thereby the appeals were
    abated. It appears by the present letter that this intelligence
    was correct as regards one of them.]

    [Footnote 114-2: The widow of a tenant in chivalry was called the
    Lord’s widow.]


784

JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[115-1]

[Sidenote: 1471 / OCT. 28]

Ryght worchepfull m[other, as lowly as] I can I recomand me to yow,
besechyng yow of your dayly blyssyng, praying yow to take thys key, and
Sir Jam[ys] . . . . . [m]y broder E., or J. Pampyng, and to ondo the
kofyr that standith at my bedys feet, and ther in a ly[tyl sqw]are box
ye shall fy[nd two de]dys, wher of the seallys be wownd in whyght paper;
my brodyr E. sye [_saw_] when I wond them up. The tone [begy]nyth
‘Sciant, &c., quod ego _Matilda Bigota_’; and the todyr begynyth
‘Sciant, &c., quod ego _Rogerus_ . . . . .’ [I pray y]ow lett [them be]
sealyd and sent me by _Radley_ with the deedes there in. Sir Jamys
knowyth the . . . . . . . But [if so] be that ye fynd not thys box with
thes two deedes in that cofyr, then I prey yow take the k[ey] . . . . .
. . . teye of the same cofyr, and opyn the cofyr that standyth in the
utter chambyr, and ther ye shall fynd . . . . . . . . . [d]edes. My
brodyr, Sir John, recomandyth hym to yow, and besechyth yow of your
blyssyng; and as for hys mater [there is yet no conclu]syon of no poynt,
but I tryst ther shall be with in thes ij. dayeys. Jenney, W.
trowbly[th] . . . . . . . [my] brodyrs servauntes with old accyons and
all syche thynges as he can renew to stoppe the oblygacio[ns w]hyche he
is bownd in on to my broder; but all shall be easeyd, I tryst. As for
Mrs. A. Hawlt, the mater is mevyd [by div]ers of the Qwenys consayll,
and of ferre by R. Hault, but he wold it shold be fyrst of our mocyon,
and we wold [it] shold com of theym fyrst; our mater shold be the
bettyr.

Tydynges, ther is a generall pardon mevyd whyche my brodyr J. trystyth
to have the preve[lege] of as soone as it is grantyd, whyche shall bee a
bowght All Halow tyed at the ferthest. I have spok with my L[ord Rive]rs
and with all myn old aqweyntance, and have good cheer of theym, hold as
it maye. When we be conclud[yd in] eny poynte of our maters, ye shall
have knowlage ther howhe to put yow in [comfort] er we have eny . . .
but in veyn when we have comfort ye shall have parte. Newe tydynges,
datys s . . . [s]ugyr of Mr. Kwte (?) x_d._ di.lb., and bettyr I tryst.
No more, but I beseche God preserve yow and yours.

Wretyn on [Seint] Symondes Day and Jwde.

  Your humblest sone and servaunt,

  J. PASTON.

    [Footnote 115-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] There was a general
    pardon in the latter part of the year 1471, and both John Paston
    and his brother took advantage of it, as appears by the _Pardon
    Roll_, 11 Edw. IV., membranes 9 and 25. The date of this letter is
    also shown by the answer to it, written by Margaret Paston on the
    5th November. Many of the words in this letter are lost by the
    mutilation of the original MS., which is full of holes, from
    having been exposed at one time to damp. The address is almost
    completely lost, but a portion of the word ‘[Ma]rgaret’ is
    visible, and a small fragment of an endorsement below in which the
    word ‘Paston’ is legible.]

  [[Footnote 115-1
  _footnote number printed 2 for 1_]]


785

SIR JOHN PASTON’S DEEDS[116-1]

_In the square trussyng coffre._

A boxe with evydence off my place in Fletstrett.

A lytell box with obligacions off the Archbisshop off York and W.
Jennyes oblygacion.

A box with evydence of Tytlyshall.

A box with the letter of attorney off Fastolffes londes by Sir John
Paston.

j. A box de actis inter episcopum Wynt’ et J. P. militem. Item endentur’
de argento mutuato termino Trinitatis anno x^{o,} et testamentum W.
Paston, Justic’.

Item, ij. pixides de novis cartis de terris Fastolffes.

Item, a litell box with the obligacion off T. Fastolff and one off James
Gresham.

Item, a box with the dede off gyfft off J. P., and the byll assygnyd for
the dyamant.

Item, the bagge de placitis in usu.

Item, the bagge with ger taken owt off my caskett.

Item, a bagge with the bondell where on was wreten ‘London.’

Item, a bagge with evydence off Est Bekham.

Item, a bondell de actis parlimenti et de excambia in Paston.

Item, a bondell de actis Cantuariensis.

Item, a bondell de fyrma Caster Berdolffis.

The endenture off Snaylwell by Wylleys.

A bondell of Gresham Moleyns.

A bondell off processe off th’eschekyr letter and byllys sirca (_sic_)
festum Johannis anno ix^{o.}

Item, th’endenture off W. Jeney. Item, a bondell off letteris and byllis
anno x^{o.}

A bondell with inquisicions not returnyd in to the Chanceri.

Copia voluntatis Fastolff ultima et probata.

Enventorium (_sic_) apud Caster per Episcopum Norwic’ et dominum de
Scales et alia ad rediseisinam (?)

Apunctuamentum Regis et litera amici. Endentura de Fennes per patrem
Hugonis Fenne.

The verray endenture off my mariage.

Item, a bondell off letteris from my brother John.

Item, iij. billis, the endenter of W. Jenney for Bacton, a byll of
Wylleys and one off J. Owdin (?)

Item, a bondell with the names off them that had stoff from Heylesdon.

Item, a byll off Sweynesthorp. Item, a byll off Brok off Dedham off the
purchace theroff, a quitance pro Scaccario.

A bonde towchyng the probatt off Fastolffes will, with mi olde
testament.

A copie off a generalle releffe de terris Fastolffes.

    [Footnote 116-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] The following inventory
    is in the handwriting of Sir John Paston. The date at which it was
    drawn up must, from internal evidence, be later than the tenth
    year of Edward IV.; so perhaps it may be a list of the contents of
    the coffer mentioned by John Paston in Letter 784.]

  [[Item, th’endenture ...
  Apunctuamentum Regis ...
  Item, a byll ...
  _each section printed as shown, with two items in a paragraph_]]


786

ABSTRACT[117-1]

WILLIAM PEKOC TO SIR JOHN PASTON

[Sidenote: 1471(?) / NOV. 4]

Has received Wheteley’s letter, but though he has spoken to Sir John’s
tenants at Paston, Bakton, etc., has obtained no money to send him. They
are better pleased to pay Sir John than Master ‘Will. P.,’ so they be
saved harmless. Has put them in good comfort, and Sir John must take
care that they be not sued this term. The fishing was never worse. No
herring to be got under 13_s._ 4_d._ a barrel, and 8_s._ 4_d._ a cade.
The swans were sent the week after your departure. John Osborn and Munde
are merry. None dead at Caster and Mawteby since Michaelmas, but much
mortality still at Fylby, Ormysby, and Scrowby.

Mawteby, 4 Nov.

  [This letter most probably belongs to the year 1471, which it will
  be seen by the letter immediately following was a year of great
  mortality.]

    [Footnote 117-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]


787

MARGARET PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[118-1]

[Sidenote: 1471 / NOV. 5]

I grete you wele, and send you Goddes blyssyng and myn, letyng you wete
that myn Cosyn Clere hathe sent to me for the C. marc that I borwed of
her for your brother. It fortuned so that a frend of her of late hath
loste better than CCC. marc, and he sent to her for money, and she had
non that she myght comyn by, and ther for she sent to me for the seyd C.
marc; and I know not how to do therfor, for by my trowth I have it not,
nor I can not make shyft therfor, and I shuld go to preson; therfor
comune with your brother her of, and send me word how that he wull make
shyft ther for in hast. I must elles nedes sell all my woods, and that
shall dysse avayll him better than a CC. marc, and I dey; and if I shuld
selle them now, ther wull noman gewe so myche for them be ner an C. marc
as they be worth, be cause ther be so many wood sales in Norfolke at
thys tyme. Therfor lete hym make purvyaunce therfor in hast, as he wull
have my good wyll, and wull that I save hym the seyd woods to the better
a wayll, and send me word here of in hast if ye wull my welfare, for I
shall never be in quiete tille I k[n]owe an ende in thys, for she hath
therfor an obligacion of an C_li._ And it is not kepte cloos, ther be
many persones now k[n]owyn it, which me semyth a greet rebuke to me that
I departyd so largely with yowr brother that I reservyd not to pay that
I was endaungered for hym, and so have dyverse seyd to me which of late
have k[n]owyn it; and whan I remembre it, it is to myn hart a very
spere, consideryng that he never gave comforte therein, ner of all the
money that hath be reseyvyd wull never make shyft therfor. And he had
yet be for thys tyme have sent me l. marc thereof, yet I wuld have
thought that he had had summe consideracion of myn daungers that I have
put me in for hym. Remembre hym how that I have excusyd hym of xx_li._
that the Prior of Bromholm had, which shuld elles have be in that
daunger that it shuld have be to us a grete rebwke, with hought that he
myght a ben holpyn wyth shuch money as he shuld have had of your fadyrs
bequest; and I payd to the shereffe for hym also money. All thes shuld
have holpe me wele therto, be syde other thynges that I have bor thys
yeres that I speke not of; there fore lete hym helpe me now, or elles it
shall dysawayll hym better than the trebyll the money, wheder that I
leve or dey, with ought he hath better consideracion to the daungers
that I stond in. Also I wulde ye shuld meve hym to take John Pampyng to
hym, or elles to gete hym a servyce in the Chauncery, or in sume other
place where as he myth be preferryd, for it ys pety that he lesyth hys
tyme so her, and it is non a wayll to non of ws, and for diverse othyr
thyngs whesch ye shall knowe her after, I wolde that I war hens in
haste, for all maner of happys, constrw ye, &c. I can yw thanke for ywyr
lettyr that ye sente me, and that ye have inquiryd of shwch thynges as
ye thynk that shwld plese me. I send yow the boxe and the dedes that ye
sente to me for, but as for the key of the cofyr in the wtter chambyr I
can not fynd yt; yf the boxe had be ther in, ye cwdnat not have hadd yth
but yf [_unless_] I had broke wp the cofyr; ther for remembre yw wer ye
have do the key; I kep styll the key that ye sente me tyll that ye cwm
home.

As for the tydynges here, ywr cosyn Barney of Wychshynggham ys passyd to
Gode, hwm Gode asoyle. Veylys wife, and Lodonys wife, and Pycard the
bacar of Twmlond, ben gone also; all thys hwlsold and thys parych ys as
ye leftyd, blyssyd be Gode; we lewyn in fer, but we wut not qweder to
fle, for to be better than we ben here. I send yw demi a riale for to by
wyth swger[119-1] and dates for me. I pray yw do as wel as ye can, and
sende it me as hastely as ye may, and sende me word qwat price a _li._
of peppyr, clowys, masis, gingyr, and sinamun, almannys, ryse, ganyngal,
safrwn, reysonys of Corons, grenys,[120-1] of ych of these sende me the
pryce of ych of these,[120-2] and yf that it be bettir shepe at London
than it is here, I shal sende yw mony to bye wyth soch stwfe as I wull
have. Remember that I spake to yw to spek to ywyr brother for the seyd
C. marc wan ye departed hens. I trow ye had forgettyt, that ye sent me
non answer ther of in ony wys. Lete me have an answer ther of in hast,
and sende me woord how ywyr brother and ye spede in ywyr maters; and
Goddes blissyng and myn mut ye have both, and send yw good sped in all
ywyr maters.

Wretyn in hast on Sent Levnards Eve.[120-3]

  By ywyr Moder.

    [Footnote 118-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter is not
    addressed, and the MS. is in fact only a corrected draft, of which
    a fair copy has since been found. The fair copy is not addressed
    either. The letter was evidently written to John Paston in answer
    to No. 784. The date is ascertained by the fact that John Berney
    of Witchingham died in the year 1471.]

    [Footnote 119-1: In Fenn’s edition this is printed ‘swgar, feg,
    and dats.’ The word ‘feg’ is not in the MS. It seems to be a
    misreading of ‘swg’’ (sugar), which the transcriber forgot to
    cancel.]

    [Footnote 120-1: F. adds ‘and comfyts,’ but the words are not in
    the MS.]

    [Footnote 120-2: F. reads ‘the price of a _li._,’ but this is not
    in the MS.]

    [Footnote 120-3: The following sentence is added in the fair copy:
    ‘I warn yw kepe this letter clos and lese yt not; rather brenyt.’]


788

BILL OF COSTS[120-4]

_Termino Sancti Michaelis Anno xj^o E. iiij^ti pro Ricardo Calle deff’
versus Willelmum Huggan q. in placito trans’._

[Sidenote: 1471 / NOV.]

  In primis, for a copy of the bill,
    iiij_d._

  Item, for makyng of the awnswer to Mr. Pygot, Mr. Fayrefax, and to
  Mr. Hosy,
    x_s._

  Item, wyne and perys at tavern ij. tymes,
    xiiij_d._

  Item, for a copy of record in the Kynges Bench,
    iij_s._ iiij_d._

  Item, for pledyng of the record in the Kynges Bench a yenst Wyll.
  Huggan,
    x_s._

  Item, gyven to Hosey, the xxvij. day of the same moneth, for to
  enparle[120-5] to the bill,
    iij_s._ iiij_d._

  Item, the xxx. day of October, for the copy of the tytelyng of
  Huggans plee,
    iiij_d._

  Item, for wyne at [the] Cardenall Hatte[120-6] the same day,
    vj_d._

  Item, the iiij. day of November, gyven to Mr. Fayrfax and Mr. Hosey
  for puttyng yn of the replicacyon,
    vj_s._ viij_d._

  Item, the x. day of November, gyven to Mr. Fayrfax, Mr. Pygotte,
  and Mr. Hosey, for the seyng of the paper, and comenyng of the issewe
  a yenst Wyll. Huggan,
    x_s._

  Item, for the wyne at the Cardenall Hatte,
    [121-1]viij_d._

  Item, for the entre of the aunswere a yenst Huggan by Ric. Calle,
  payd to Sandys,
    v_s._

  Item, to Nedersole for makyng of the paper,
    ij_s._ vj_d._

  Item, for the copy of the same,
    ij_s._ vj_d._

    Summa totalis, lvj_s._ iiij_d._

    [Footnote 120-4: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]

    [Footnote 120-5: To _imparl_, a technical expression, meaning to
    obtain time to plead.]

    [Footnote 120-6: A tavern in Southwark. The name is still
    preserved in Cardinal Hat Alley.]

    [Footnote 121-1: _N.B._--Under viij_d._ is written ‘46_s._ 4_d._’
    in a different hand.]

  [[... for makyng of the paper,
  ij_s._ vj_d._
  _text has s, for s._]]


789

EDMUND PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[121-2]

_Tho my rytgh wurshepfull brother John Paston, in hast._

[Sidenote: 1471 / NOV. 18]

Rygh wurshipful brother, I recumawnd me to zow, prayeng zow hartely that
ze wyl remembyr soche maters as I wryth to zow. I send zow now be the
brynggar her of mony, wycche mony I pray zow that [ye[121-3]] be stowe
yt as I wryth to zow. I wend a don yt my sylf but consyderyng costis and
other dyvers thyngis I may not bryng yt abowthe. Wher for I pray zow
hartely to take the labour up on zow, and I trust to deservyt. I pray
zow be stow thys mony thus: to Christofyr Hanyngton v_s._: to the
prynspall of Stapylin[121-4] v_s._ in parte of payment. Also I pray zow
to bye me iij. zerddis of porpyl schamlet, price the zerd iiij_s._, a
bonet of depe murry, pryce ij_s._ iiij_d._, an hose clothe of zelow
carsey of an ellyn, I trow yt wyl cost ij_s._; a gyrdyl of plunkket
ryban, price vj_d._; iiij. lacis of sylke ij. of one color and ij. of
ane other, price viij_d._; iij. doseyn poynttis wythe red and zelow,
price vj_d._; iij. peyer of pateyns. I pray zow late Wylliam Mylsant
purvey for them. I was wonte to pay but ij_d._ ob. for a payer, but I
pray zow late them not be lefte behyng thow I pay mor; they must be lowe
pateyns; late them be long inow and brode up on the hele. Among all
other I pray zow recumawnd me to Mastres Elyzabet Hygons. I may sey
poverte partes feleschepe. Yf that I had ben so well purveyde as I wend
I trowst to have ben with zow her thys; also I pray zow recumawnd me to
my brother Sir John. I fer lasse he wyl take a dysplesur with me that I
send hym no mony. I pray zow excuse me as ze can. I trust to send hym
sum a bowth Candylmesse. I had a promyse of Masteres Elyzabeth of a
typet of welvet; but and I myth have a hatlase I woold thynk me well.
I pray zow sey thus myche on zour owyn hed, and yf ze can not sped of
the hatlase I pray zow bye me one of xij_d._ or xvj_d._ Also Sir I send
Parkar hys mony be the brynggar har of and I have desyered hym to lend
me a gown of puke, and I have send hym a typet of welvet to boredyr yt
[round [122-1]] a bowthe; and I pray zow be at schesyng there of; and yf
that he wyl not be cryst calkestowe over hys hed that is schoryle in
Englysche, yt is a terme newe browthe up with my marschandis of Norwych.
Sir John Pampyng recummawnd hym to zow and pray zow that ze wyl remembyr
hys harnes, and yf that ze can get the mony he pray zow to delyver
Parkar x_s._ that he howyth hym. Also, sir, my modyr gretis zow wel and
send zow Goddis blyssyng and heres, and prays zow that ze wyl bye her a
runlet of Malmesey owthe of the galey; and yf ze have no mony sche byd
that ze schuld borow of my brother Sir John, or of sum other frend of
zowers, and send [he]r[122-1] woord as hastily as ze have it, and sche
schale send zow mony; and yf that ze send it home sche byd that yt
schuld be woond in a canivasse for brochyng of the caryars, for sche
sethe that sche hath knowyn men served soo befor. Also I pray zow, if ze
speke with Master Roger, tell hym that yf he cum in to thys cuntre thys
crystemas, he schal have hys x_s._, and yf that he cum not I schal send
yt hym be xij. day [_Twelfth Day_] at the fardest. I pray zow, hartely
remembyr my gere, and that ze wyl desyere Wylliam Mylsant on my be halve
to purvey for the caryage in as hasty wyse as yt can. Also I pray zow
that the welvet that levyt of my typet may be send hom a geyn, for I
woold strype a dobelet ther with. As for Masteres Blakenye, I trowe sche
in zour quarters. I woold I had the same entyrpryce up on hyr that John
Bramppton of Atylborowe had up on master Byrston. Alle the Coorte
recommawndes hem tow zow. I pray zow, and ze can get me any profytable
servyce, a saye. My brother Sir John was meved of my hawnt Ponyngges to
have ben with here. I woold have rytgh an hesy servyse tyl I were owthe
of detis. God have zow in Hys kepyng. Wretyn at Norwyche, the Monday nex
be fore Sen Edmond the Kyng.

  EDMOND PASTON.

On the back of the letter are the following memoranda:--

  In primis, to the pryncypall of Stapyll In
    v_s._

  Item, for iiij. lasys
    viij_d._

  Item, for iij. doseyn poyntes
    vj_d._

  Item, for a plonket ryban
    vj_d._

    [Footnote 121-2: [Add. MS. 34,889, f. 130, and Add. MS. 27,445, f.
    52.] The MS. of this letter is in two fragments, from which it is
    now printed entire. The year in which it was written is shown by
    Margaret Paston’s letter to the writer’s brother John Paston, on
    the 29th November 1471 (No. 791), in which she apologises for not
    sending him money for a runlet of wine she had desired him to
    purchase for her, on account of the number of thieves stirring. It
    will be seen that she made the request by means of her son Edmund
    in this letter.]

    [Footnote 121-3: Omitted in MS.]

    [Footnote 121-4: Staple Inn.]

    [Footnote 122-1: Mutilated.]

  [[to boredyr yt [round [122-1]]
  _unclear punctuation or flyspeck between editorial “round” and
  footnote marker_]]


790

ABSTRACT[123-1]

[MARGARET PASTON] TO HER SON [SIR JOHN PASTON]

[Sidenote: 1471(?) / NOV. 20]

Wonders she has no answer to her letter by Ric. Raddeley. Wants him and
his brother to get a discharge from my Lord of Canterbury, ‘for
occupying of your father’s goods.’ If my Lord died before we got it, his
successor might be ‘more hasty upon us than he hath been.’ My Lord knows
the great charges we have had since he deceased, which have caused the
goods to be spent. If any of us were to die, no one would take charge
for us unless we have a discharge. Remember the spices and malmsey I
have sent to you for.

St. Edmund’s Day the King.

  _Sealed._

  [At the date of this letter, Sir John Paston and his brother John
  were together in London, and apparently the Archbishop of Canterbury
  was seriously ill. Of the latter fact we have no certain knowledge,
  but it appears by a subsequent letter that there was a report of his
  death in June 1472, and the two brothers were certainly in London
  together in November of the year preceding. It is probable therefore
  that the Archbishop was ill of the epidemic which prevailed in the
  latter part of 1471 and the spring of 1472. The two brothers were
  not together in November 1472.]

    [Footnote 123-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]


791

MARGARET PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[124-1]

_To John Paston, Esquier, be this delyverd in hast._

[Sidenote: 1471 / NOV. 29]

I grete zow welle, and send zow Goddes blyssyng and myn, letyng zow wete
that I have a letter from zour brother, wherby I undyrstand that he
cannot, ner may, make no porveyans for the C. mark; the wyche causythe
me to be rythgh hevy, and for other thynges that he wrytht to me of that
he is in dawnger. For remembering wat we have had befor thys and ho
symppylly yt hath be spente and to lytyl profythe to any of us, and now
arn in soche casse that non of us may welle helpe other with owte that
we schuld do that wer to gret a dysworschip for us to do, owther to
selle wood or lond or soche stuffe that were nessessary for us to have
in owr howsys; so mot I answer a for God, I wot not how to do for the
seyde money, and for other thyngges that I have to do of scharge, and my
worshup saved. Yt is a deth to me to thynk up on yt. Me thynkyth be zour
brothers wrythtyng, that he thynkyth that I am informed be sume that be
a bowthe me to do and to sey as I have be for thys, but be my trowthe he
demyth a mysse; yt nedyth me not to be informed of no soche thengges.
I construe in my owyn mend, and conseyve i now and to myche, and whan I
have brokyn my conseyte to sume that in happe he deniythe yt too, they
have put me in cownforth more than I kowde have be any imajynasyon in my
owyn conseythe. He wrythetyth to me also, that he hath spend thys terme
xl_li._ Yt is a gret thyng; me thynkyth be good dyscresyon ther mythe
myche ther of aben sparyd. Zour fadyr, God blysse hys sowle, hathe had
as gret maters to do as I trowe he hathe had thys terme, and hath not
spend halfe the mony up on them in so lytyl tyme, and hath do ryth well.
At the reverens of God, avyse hym zet to be war of hys expences and
gydyng that yt be no schame to us alle. Yt is a schame and a thyng that
is myche spokyn of in thys contre that zour faders graveston is not mad.
For Goddes love, late yt be remembyrd and porveyde for in hast. Ther
hathe be mych mor spend in waste than schuld have mad that, me thynkyth
be zour brother that he is wery to wrythe to me and there fore I wyl not
a kumbyr hym with wrythtyng to hym. Ze may telle hym as I wryth to zow.
Item, I woold ze schuld remembyr zour brother of Pekerngges mater, if he
cum not hom hastely, that ze and Townesend and Lumnor may examyn and
sette yt thorow. The pore man is almost on don ther by, and hys brother
suethe hym and trobylyth hym sor zet; and also for the plesur of my
koseyn Clere and the Lady Bolen, I woold yt were sette thorow.

As for my rowndlet of wyne, I schuld send zow mony there fore, but I dar
not put yt in joperte, ther be so many theves stereng. John Lovedayes
man was robbyd in to hys schyrte as he cam home ward. I trow, and ze
assaye Towneshend or Playter, or sum other good kuntery man of owrys to
lend yt zow for me tyl they cum hom, they wyl do so myche for me and I
schal contente them a geyn. Item, Jamys Gressham hath ben passyng sekke
and ys zet. Judy tellythe me that zour brother is avysed for to sue hym.
For Goddes sake, late non onkyndnesse be schewed to hym, for that woold
sone make an hend of hym. Remembyr ho keynd and true hartyd he hath ben
to us to hys powre; and he had nevere take that offyce upon hym that he
is in dawnger for, ne had be for owr sakkes. He hathe sold a gret parte
of hys lond there for, as I suppose ze have knowlache of. Late yt be
remembyrd, and ellys owr enmyes wyl rejoysyt, and ther wyl no wurshup be
ther in at long way.

I schuld wryth mor but I have no leyser at thys tyme. I trow ze wyl sone
kum hom, and there fore I wryth the lesse. God kepe zow and send zow
good speede, &c. Wretyn the Fryday, Sen Andrue Ev.

  Be zour modyr.

_The following note is written on the back of the Letter in Sir John
Fenn’s hand_:--‘This letter was fastened by threads brought through with
a needle and made fast by the seal. The threads being cut on the
directed side, the letter is opened without breaking the seal.’

    [Footnote 124-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] St. Andrew’s Eve, the
    29th November, fell on a Friday in 1471. It will also be seen that
    the beginning of this letter refers to the same subject as the
    beginning of Letter 787.]


792

MARGARET PASTON TO JOHN PASTON, ESQUIRE[126-1]

_To John Paston, Esquyer, be this deliuered._

[Sidenote: 1471(?) / DEC. [1]]

I grete you wele, and send you Goddis blyssyng and myn. Desyryng you to
send me word how that your brother doth. It was told her that he shuld
have be ded, which caused many folkis and me bothyn to be right hevy.
Also it was told me this day that ye wer hurt be affray that was mad up
on you be feles disgysed. Ther fore, in any wyse send me word in hast
how your brother doth and ye bothyn; for I shall not ben wele at eas
till I know how that ye do. And for Goddis love lete your brother and ye
be ware how that ye walken, and with what felesshep ye etyn or drynkyn,
and in what place, for it was seid here pleynly that your brothere was
poysoned. And this weke was on of Drayton with me and told me that there
were diverse of the tenauntis seid that thei wost not what to do if that
your brothere came home; and ther was on of the Duk of Suffolkis men by,
and bad them not feryn, for his wey shuld be shorted and [_i.e._ if] he
shuld come there. Wherfore, in any wyse be ware of your self, for I can
thynk thei geve no fors what to do to be wenged and to put you from your
entent, that thei myght have her wyll in Ser John Fastolffis land.
Thy[nke][126-2] what gret sor[ow][126-2] it [shu]ld[126-2] be to me and
any . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I had lever ye had
never know the lond; remembre it was the distruccion of your fadre;
trost not mych up on promyses of lordis now a days that ye shuld be the
suerer of the favor of there men. For there was a man, and a lordis
sone, seid but late, and toke it for an exampill that Sir Robert
Harecourt had the good will of the lordis after ther comyng in, and yet
within shorte tyme after here men kylled hym in hys owyn place. A mannes
deth is litill set by now a days. Therefore be ware of symulacion, for
thei wull speke ryht fayr to you that wuld ye ferd [_fared_] right
evyll. The blissid Trynyte have you in his kepyng. Wretyn in gret hast
the Saterday next after Sent Andrewe.

Lete this letter be brent whan ye have understond it. Item, I pray you
send me iiij. suger lofis, ich of them of iij_li._, and iiij_li._ of
datis if thei be newe. I send you x_s._ be the berer hereof; if ye pay
more I shall pay it you ageyn whan ye come home. And forgete not to send
me word be the berere hereof how ye don; and remembre the bylles and
remembrauns for the maner of Gresham that I wrote to your brother for.

  Be your moder.

    [Footnote 126-1: [Add. MS. 34,889, f. 211.] This letter may be of
    the year 1471, when it would seem by No. 791 that the two
    brothers, Sir John and John, were both together (in London, no
    doubt) about St. Andrew’s Day. If so, it was written just two days
    after that letter, on the receipt of unpleasant news, which was
    evidently false.]

    [Footnote 126-2: Mutilated.]


793

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[127-1]

[Sidenote: 1471]

. . . . the very valew of Sporlewood passyth not C. mark of no manys
mony that I can spek with, and to be payid by dayis as the byll that
Jwde shall delyv[er] . . . rehers; and ther ayenst ye shold loose
iij_li._ of the ferme of the maner yerly, whych standyth by undyr wood;
and yet the fense must stand yow over on xij. mark by the lest wey; but,
by God, and I wer as ye, I wold not sell it for C. mark more then it is
woorthe. Syr John Styll recomandyth hym to your good mastyrsheppe, and
seyth pleynly if ye wyll he wyll com up to yow and awayte on yow
whersoever ye be, coort or othyr. By Seynt Mary, he is owyng more mony
than I wend; for he is owyng for a twelmonthe and a quarter at thys
Crystmas, savyng for hys boord, xij_d._ a wek for iij. quarters; and he
seythe pleynly that ye and R. Calle both bad hym syng styll for Syr John
Fastolf as he dyd before; but I have bodyn hym that he shall get hym a
servyse now at thys Crystmas; and so he shall, withowt that ye send hym
othyr wyse woord, or ellys that ye or I may get hym som benefyse or fre
chapell, or som othyr good servyse whych I praye yow enqwer for.

Item, and ye werk wysly your mater myght com in with othyr maters of the
lordes in ther apoyntmentes with the Kyng, but it wold be labord to a
porpose this Crystmas whyll ye have leyser to spek with your mastyr.
Item, myn aqweyntans with the Lord Revers is none othyrwyse but as it
hathe ben alweys; savyng and he go no to Portygall to be at a day upon
the Serasyns, I porpose and have promysyd to be ther with hym; and that
jorney don, as Wykys seythe, farwell he. He porposyth to go forward a
bowt Lent, but Fortune with hyr smylyng contenans strange of all our
porpose may mak a sodeyn change. I ensuer yow he thynkyth all the world
gothe on ther syd ayen; and as for my comyng up at the begynnyng of thys
next term, with owt ye send me othyrwyse woord that I myght do yow som
good when I wer com, by my feyth I com not ther, for it shold put yow to
a cost, and me to a labor and cost bothe; but [if] ye send for me I com
streyght, thow I tery the lesse whyll ther, and so I shall withowt I may
do yow som good. By my feythe I porpose to make up my byllys clere, and
send yow the copyse as hastyly as I can. Yonge Wyseman othyrwye callyd
Foole, told me that Sir W. Yelverton is abowt to make a bargayne with
the Dwches of Suffolk or with my Lord of Norfolk, whyche he may get
fyrst, for the maner of Gwton. I reseyve all yet, God hold it.

I praye yow recomand me to my brodyr Molyenewx, and all othyr good
felaws.

  J. P.

    [Footnote 127-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This seems to be only a
    portion of a letter, beginning in the middle of a sentence.
    Probably it was a second leaf added to a more lengthy epistle. It
    is written on one side of a slip of paper and is in the hand of
    John Paston the younger. It is endorsed ‘John Paston’ in that of
    his brother Sir John, to whom it was doubtless addressed. The date
    must be towards the end of the year 1471, as it appears by the
    letter immediately following that Lord Rivers embarked for
    Portugal that year on Christmas Eve.]

  [[Yonge Wyseman othyrwye callyd / Foole
  _text unchanged: error for “othyrwyse”?_]]


794

MARGARET PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[129-1]

[Sidenote: 1471]

I grete you wele; letyng you wete that ther was told me a thyng in your
absens that goth right nere myn hert, be a wurchepfull man and such an
as ye wuld beleve and geffe credence to, and that owyth you right good
wille; which if it had comyn to myn remembraunce at your departer I wuld
have spoke to you of it most specially befor all other materis; but I am
so trobilled in my mende with your materis that thei be so delayd and
take no better conclusion, and with the ontrowth that is in servantis
now a days but if the maysteris take better heed to ther handis, that
such thyngis as I wuld rathest remembre I sonest for gete. It was told
me that ye have sold Sporle wood of a right credebill and wurchepful
man, and that was right hevy that ye shuld be know of such disposicion,
consederyng how your fader, whos sowle God assoyl, cherysshed in every
manor his woodis. And for the more preffe that this shuld be trought,
the forseid person told me that it was told hym of on [_one_] that was
toward Sir William Yelverton, to whom Richard Calle shuld have seid in
thes termes, that Sporle Wood shuld be sold, and that it shuld comyn now
in to Cristen mennes handis. Which if it were knowyn shuld cause bothyn
your elmyse [_enemies_] and your frendis to thynk that ye dede it for
right gret nede, or ellis that ye shuld be a wastour and wuld wast your
lyvelod. If ye had do so in Sir John Fastolfes lyffelode, men shuld have
supposid that ye had do it of good pollice, be cause of the onsuerte
that it stoonit (?) in, to have takyn that ye had myght of it duryng
your possession, to have boryn ought the daungere of it with the same;
but for to do this of your owyn lyffelode, men shall thyng that ye do it
for pure nede. And in asmych as it is so nere your most elmyse ere, it
shall be to you the gretter vylney and shame to all your frendis, and
the grettest coragyng and plesere that can be to your elmyse. For if ye
be thus disposid ye shall make them and all othere certeyn of that that
befor this tyme thei haue ben in dought, and cause them to purpose the
more cruelly agayn you. Where fore, in eschewyng of the greet slaundre
and inconveniens that may grow ther of, I require you, and more over
charge you upon my blissyng and as ye wull have my good will, that if
any such sale or bargany be mad, be your assent or with ought, be Calle,
or any othere in your name, that ye restreyn it; for I wuld not for a
M^l marcs that it wer understond that ye were of that disposicion, ner
that ye were comyn to so gret nede which shuld cause [y]ou to do so; for
every [man[130-1]] shuld thynk that it were thurgh your owyn
mysgovernaunce. Therefore I charge you, if any such bargayn be mad, that
ye send a bill as hastly as ye can to Herry Halman, that he do all such
as have mad or takyn that bargayn seasse and felle non of the wood, upon
peyn that may falle ther of. And how [_who_] so ever wull councell you
the contrary, do as I advyse you in this behalffe, or ellis trost never
to have comfort of me; and if I may knowe ye be of such disposicion, and
I leve ij. yer it shall disavayll you in my liffelode ccc. marcs. There
fore, send me word be the berere here of wheder ye have assent to any
such thyng or nought, and how that ye be disposid to do ther in, for I
shall not be quiete in myn hert till I understand yow of the contrary
disposicion.

  Be your more moder.

    [Footnote 129-1: [Add. MS. 34,889, f. 116.] This letter would seem
    to have been written about the end of the year 1471 or the
    beginning of 1472, when we first hear of Sir John Paston’s design
    to sell Sporle Wood. _See_ Nos. 793, 798.]

    [Footnote 130-1: Omitted in MS.]


795

SIR JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[130-2]

_To my most honorabl and tendre modre, Margrete Paston, be thys letter
delivered._

[Sidenote: 1472 / JAN. 8]

Most worschypfull and kynde moodre, I comande me to yow, and beseche yow
off yowr dayly blyssyng and remembraunce. Please it yow to wete thatt I
have my pardon,[130-3] as the berer heroff can informe yow, for comffort
wheroffe I have been the marier thys Crystmesse, and have been parte
theroff with Sir George Browen,[131-1] and with my Lady myn aunte, hys
wyffe,[131-2] and be ffor Twelthe[131-3] I come to my Lorde
Archebysshope,[131-4] wher I have hadde as greete cheer, and ben as
welkom as I cowde devyse; and iff I hadde ben in sewerte that Castr weer
hadde ageyn, I wolde have comen homewards thys daye.[131-5]

    .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .

And I beseche yow to remembr my brother to doo hys deveyr thatt I maye
have agayn my stuffe, my bookes and vestments, and my beddyng, how so
evyr he doo, thoghe I scholde gyffe xx^ti scutes by hys advyse to my
Lady Brandon, or some other goode felawe.

As for any tydynges ther be noon heer, saffe that the Kyng hath kept a
ryall Crystmesse; and now they seye that hastelye he woll northe, and
some seye that he woll into Walys, and some seye that he woll into the
West Contre. As ffor Qween Margrett, I understond that sche is remevyd
from Wyndesor to Walyngfforthe, nyghe to Ewhelme, my Lady of Suffolk
Place in Oxenforthe schyre.

And men seye that the Lorde Ryverse schyppyd on Crystmesse evyn in to
Portyngale warde; I am not serteyn.

Also the schalle be a convocacion off the Clergye in all haste, whyche
men deeme will avayle the Kynge a dyme and an halffe, some seye.
I beseche God sende yow goode heele and greater joye in on year then ye
have hadde thys vij.

Wretyn att the Moor the viij. daye off Janever, A^o E. iiij. xj.

  By yowr soone,

  JOHN PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 130-2: [From Fenn, ii. 86.]]

    [Footnote 130-3: His pardon passed the Great Seal on the 21st
    December 1471. _Pardon Roll_ 11 Edward IV., m. 25.]

    [Footnote 131-1: Sir George Browne, Knight, of Betchworth Castle,
    in Surrey.--F.]

    [Footnote 131-2: Elizabeth Paston, formerly married to Robert
    Poynings.]

    [Footnote 131-3: Twelfth day, 6th of January.--F.]

    [Footnote 131-4: George Neville, Archbishop of York.--F.]

    [Footnote 131-5: Here follow directions about Caister, and a hope
    that it might be had again by the latter end of the term, when he
    would come home, and put his lands and houses into order.--F.]


796

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[132-1]

_To my ryght worchepfull brodyr, Syr John Paston, Knyght, be thys
delyveryd._

[Sidenote: 1472 / JAN. 23]

Ryght worchepfull syr, I recomand me to yow in my best wyse, lykeyth yow
to wet[132-2]      that I have thys day delyveryd yowr mantyll, yowr ray
gowne,[132-3] and yowr crosbowys, wyth telers and wyndas, and yowr
Normandy byll to Kerby to bryng wyth hym to London.

Item, in eny wyse, and [_if_] ye can axe the probate of my fadyrs wyll
to be gevyn yow wyth the bargayn that ye make wyth my Lord of
Canterbery, and I can thynk that ye may have it, and as soone as it is
prevyd ye or I may have a lettyr of mynystracyon upon the same, and a
qwetance of my Lord Cardinalle evyn foorthe wyth; and thys wer one of
the best bargaynys that ye mad thys ij. yer I enswyr yow, and he may
make yow aqwetance or get yow one of the Bysheop of Wynchestyr for Syr
John Fastolfys goodes also, and in my reson thys wer lyght to be browght
a bowght with the same bargayn. And ye purpose to bargayn with hym ye
had need to hye yow, for it is tolde me that my Lord of Norffolk wyl
entyr in to it hastyly, and if he so doo, it is the wers for yow, and it
wyll cawse them to profyr the lesse sylvyr.

Item, I pray yow send me some secret tydyngs of the lyklyed of the world
by the next messenger that comyth between, that I may be eyther myryer
or ellys mor sory then I am, and also that I may gwyd me ther aftyr.

Item, as for Sir R. Wyngfeld, I can get no x. _li._ of hym, but he seyth
that I shall have the fayirest harneys that I can bye in London for
sylvyr, but money can I non get. I can not yet make my pesse wyth my
Lord of Norffolk nor my Lady by no meane, yet every man tellyth me that
my Lady seyth passyngly well of me allweys notwithstandyng. I trowe that
they wyll swe the apell[133-1] thys term, yet ther is no man of us
indytyd but if it wer doon a for the crowners er then we cam owt of the
plase; ther is now but iij. men in it, and the brygges alwey drawyn. No
mor, but God lant yow myn her.[133-2]

Wretyn the Twysday next aftyr Seynt Agnet the fyrst.[133-3]

  J. P.

Item, yestyrday W. Gornay entryd in to Saxthorp and ther was he kepyng
of a coort, and had the tenaunts attou[r]nyd to him, but er the coort
was all doon, I cam thedyr with a man with me and no more, and ther,
befor hym and all hys feluwschep, Gayne, Bomsted, &c., I chargyd the
tenaunts that they shold proced no ferther in ther coort upon peyn that
myght folle of it, and they lettyd for a seasen. But they sye that I was
not abyll to make my partye good, and so they procedyd ferther; and I
sye that, and set me downe by the stward and blottyd hys book wyth my
fyngyr as he wrot, so that all tenaunts afermyd that the coort was
enterupte by me as in yowr ryght, and I reqwered them to record that
ther was no pesybyll coort kept, and so they seyd they wold.

    [Footnote 132-1: [From Fenn, iv. 420.] It appears by a letter of
    the 17th February following (No. 798), that at the beginning of
    the year 1472 the Pastons were endeavouring to come to an
    understanding with the Duke of Norfolk by the intercession of the
    Duchess. For further evidence of date, see the next letter.]

    [Footnote 132-2: A blank occurs here in Fenn’s left-hand, or
    literal copy, which is not explained.]

    [Footnote 132-3: This means a gown made of cloth that was never
    either coloured or dyed.--F. But according to Halliwell ‘ray’
    means striped cloth.]

    [Footnote 133-1: This must be the appeal of the two widows, though
    one of them is said to have married again. _See_ No. 783.]

    [Footnote 133-2: This sentence I wish to have explained.--F.]

    [Footnote 133-3: The festival of St. Agnes, the first (and the
    most noted of the two), was kept on the 21st of January; her
    second festival was on the 28th of the same month, which it is to
    be observed was not the octave of the former, but a distinct feast
    upon a different occasion, and it is sometimes written ‘Agnetis
    Nativitas’; but it was on account of a miracle wrought at her tomb
    that this second feast was instituted.--F.]

  [[I can get no x. _li._
  _anomalous spacing unchanged_

  Footnote 132-2 and body text:
  _In the printed book, the blank takes up the final one-third of
  its line._]]


797

MARGARET PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[134-1]

_To John Paston, Esquyer, be thys delivered._

[Sidenote: 1472 / FEB. 5]

I grete you wele, and send you Godds blyssyng and myn, letyng you wete
that the woman that sewyth the appell ageyn your brother and his men is
comyn to London to call ther up on. And whan that she shuld come to
London ther was delivered her C. _s._ for to sewe with, so that be that
I here in this countre she wull not leve it, but that she shall calle
ther up on such tyme as shall be to your most rebuke, but if [_unless_]
ye ley the better wetch. She hath evill councell, and that wull see you
gretely uttered, and that ye may understand be the money that was take
her whan she came up, and ye shuld fynd it, I knowe it wele, if ther
myght have you at avauntage; ther for, for Godds sake make diligent
serge be the advyce of your councell, that ther be no necglicens in you
in this mater ner other for diffaught of labour, and call upon your
brother, and telle hym that I send hym Godds blyssyng and myn, and
desire hym that he wull now a while, whill he hath the Lords at his
entent, that he seke the meanes to make an ende of his maters, for his
elmyses arn gretly coraged now of late; what is the cause I knowe not.
Also, I pray you speke to Playter that ther may be fownd a meane that
the shereffe or the gaderer of grene wax[134-2] may be discharged of
certeyn issues that renne up on Fastolf for Mariotts mater, for the
balyfe was at hym this weke, and shuld have streyned hym, but that he
promysed hym that he shuld with in this viij. days labore the meanes
that he shuld be discharged or ell[es] he must content hym, &c. Also,
I send you be the berer her of, closed in this letter, v. _s._ of gold,
and pray you to bey me a suger loyfe, and dates, and almaunds, and send
it me hame, and if ye bewar [_lay out_] any mor money, whan ye came hame
I shall pait you ageyn. The Holy Gost kepe you bothyn, and deliver you
of your elmyse [_enemies_]. Wretyn on Sent Agas Day, in hast.

Item, I pray you speke to Mayster Roger[135-1] for my sorepe, for I had
never mor nede therof, and send it me as hastly as ye can.

  Be

  M. P.

    [Footnote 134-1: [From Fenn, iv. 424.] As anticipated in the
    preceding letter we here find that steps are being taken by one of
    the two women whose husbands were killed at the siege of Caister,
    to prosecute the appeal against Sir John for her husband’s death.
    The other woman, as will be seen by Letter 783, had married again
    during the year 1471, and was thus disqualified from pursuing the
    same course.]

    [Footnote 134-2: Estreats delivered to the Sheriff out of the
    Exchequer, to be levied in his county under the Seal of that
    Court, made in green wax, were from thence called green wax.--F.]

    [Footnote 135-1: Master Roger was, I suppose, some leech famous
    for his syrups, etc.--F.]

  [[C. _s._ .... v. _s._
  _anomalous spacing unchanged_]]


798

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[135-2]

_A Johan Paston, Esquier, soit doné._

[Sidenote: 1472 / FEB. 17]

Brother, I comande me to yow, and praye yow to loke uppe my _Temple of
Glasse_,[135-3] and send it me by the berer herof.

Item, as for tydyngs, I have spoken with Mestresse Anne Hault, at a
praty leyser, and, blyssyd be God, we be as ffer fforthe as we weer
toffoor, and so I hoope we schall contenew; and I promysed hyr, that at
the next leyser that I kowd ffynde therto that I wolde come ageyn and
see hyr; whyche wyll take a leyser as [I] deeme now; syn thys observance
is over doon, I purpose nott to tempte God noo moor soo.

Yisterday the Kynge, the Qween, my Lordes of Claraunce and Glowcester,
wente to Scheen to pardon; men sey, nott alle in cheryte; what wyll
falle, men can nott seye.

The Kynge entretyth my Lorde off Clarance ffor my Lorde of Glowcester;
and, as itt is seyde, he answerythe, that he may weell have my Ladye hys
suster in lawe, butt they schall parte no lyvelod, as he seythe; so what
wyll falle can I nott seye.

Thys daye I purpose to see my Lady off Norffolk ageyn, in goode howr be
it!

Ther is proferyd me marchaunts ffor Sporle woode. God sende me goode
sale whan I be gynne; that poor woode is soor manashed and thrett.

Yitt woote I nott whether I come home beffoor Esterne or nott, I schall
sende yow worde. No moor, &c.

Wretyn the ffyrst Tewesdaye off Lenton.

  JOHN PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 135-2: [From Fenn, ii. 90.] After the death of Prince
    Edward, the son of Henry VI., who is said to have been murdered
    just after the Battle of Tewkesbury in May 1471, Richard, Duke of
    Gloucester, married his widow Anne, who was the daughter of
    Warwick the Kingmaker. The reference to the proposed sale of
    Sporle wood goes further to fix the date. _See_ Letter 793, and
    Nos. 819 and 820 following.]

    [Footnote 135-3: A poem of Lydgate’s.]


799

ABSTRACT[136-1]

[Sidenote: 1472 / APRIL 10]

Norfolk and Suffolk Deeds, No. 38.--‘Relaxatio Johannis Paston facta
Willielmo Wainflet et aliis totius juris in manerio vocat’ Pedham Hall
in Beyton, etc., in omnibus terris, tenementis, redditibus, etc., in
villis de Beyton, Akle, Birlingham, et Hykling, quæ quondam fuerunt
Johannis Fastolf.--April 10, Edw. IV., 12.’--There is a similar deed of
the same date including the manor of Titchwell, numbered ‘Titchwell, 5,’
in the collection.

    [Footnote 136-1: [From MS. Index in Magd. Coll., Oxford.]]


800

SIR JOHN PASTON TO HIS BROTHER, JOHN PASTON[136-2]

_To Master John Paston, or to my mestresse, hys Modre, be this letter
delyveryd in hast._

[Sidenote: 1472 / APRIL 30]

Brother, I comand me to yow[136-3]     .      .      .      .
    .      .      .      .      .      .      .

By Juddy I sende yow a letter by Corby with in iiij. dayes byffor thys;
and ther with ij. potts off oyle for saladys, whyche oyle was goode as
myght be when I delyveryd itt, and schall be goode at the reseyvynge,
iff it be nott mysse handelyd, nor mysse karryd.

Item, as ffor tydyngs, the Erle of Northomberlonde is hoome in to the
Northe, and my Lord off Glowcester schall afftr as to morow, men seye.
Also thys daye Robert of Racclyff weddyd the Lady Dymmok at my place in
Fleet-street, and my Ladye and yowrs, Dame Elizbeth Bowghcher,[137-1] is
weddyd to the Lorde Howards soon and heyr.[137-2] Also Sir Thomas
Walgrave is ded off the syknesse that reygnyth, on Tewesday, now [_no_]
cheer ffor yowe. Also my Lorde Archebysshope[137-3] was browt to the
Towr on Saterday at nyght, and on Mondaye, at mydnyght, he was conveyd
to a schyppe, and so in to the see, and as yitt I can nott undrestande
whedyr he is sent, ner whatt is fallyn off hym; men seye, that he hathe
offendyd, but as John Forter seythe, some men sey naye; but all hys meny
ar dysparblyd [_dispersed_], every man hys weye; and som that ar greete
klerkys, and famous doctors of hys, goo now ageyn to Cambrygge to
scoolle. As ffor any other tydyngs I heer noon. The Cowntesse off
Oxenfford[137-4] is stylle in Seynt Martyns; I heer no word off hyr. The
Qween hadde chylde, a dowghter, but late at Wyndesor; ther off I trow ye
hadde worde. And as ffor me, I am in lyke case as I was. And as ffor my
Lorde Chamberleyn,[137-5] he is nott yitt comen to town; when he comythe
than schall I weete what to doo. Sir John of Parr is yowr ffrende and
myn, and I gaffe hym a ffayr armyng sworde within this iij. dayes.
I harde somwhat by hym off a bakke ffreende off yowr; ye schall knowe
moor her afftr.

Wretyn the last daye of Apryll.

    [Footnote 136-2: [From Fenn, i. 288.] The date of this letter is
    ascertained by the fact that Sir Thomas Waldegrave died on the
    28th April 1472.--_See_ Inquisition post mortem, 12 Edw. IV., No.
    4.]

    [Footnote 136-3: Here (according to Fenn) follows an order for
    making out an account and receiving some rents, etc.]

    [Footnote 137-1: Elizabeth, daughter and heiress of Sir Frederic
    Tilney, Knight, and widow of Sir Humphrey Bourchier, son of John,
    first Lord Berners. Her husband was slain at the battle of
    Barnet.]

    [Footnote 137-2: Thomas Howard, afterwards created Duke of
    Norfolk, by Henry VIII., for his victory over the Scots at
    Flodden. He was son and heir of John, Lord Howard.]

    [Footnote 137-3: George Nevill, Archbishop of York.]

    [Footnote 137-4: Margaret, wife of John de Vere, Earl of Oxford,
    daughter of Richard Nevill, Earl of Salisbury, and sister of
    Warwick the Kingmaker.]

    [Footnote 137-5: William, Lord Hastings.]


801

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[138-1]

_To Mastyr Syr John Paston, Knyght, in hast._

[Sidenote: 1472 / MAY 14]

Syr, I recomande me to yow, &c. W. Gorney and I ar apoyntyd that ther
shall no mony be takyn at Saxthorp tyll thys terme be past, for he hathe
promysyd me to spek with yow and your consell, and that ye shall tak a
wey betwyx yow so that ye shall be bothe plesyd. He had warnyd a coort
at Saxthorp and to have be kep upon Holy Rood Day last past, and ther he
wold have gadyrd the half yere ferm, but it fortunyd me to be there ere
the coort was half done, and I took syche a wey with hym that the qwest
gave no verdyt, ner they procedyd no ferther in ther cort, nor gadyrd no
mony ther, nor not shall do, tyll syche tym as ye spek to gedyr, and
[_if_] ye be at London thys term; but and ye be not at London, I wold
avyse yow to let Townysend tak a wey with hym, for it lyeth not in my
power to keep werre with hym; for and I had not delt ryght corteysly up
on Holy Rood Day I had drownk to myn oystyrs, for yowng Heydon had
reysyd as many men as he kowd mak in harneys to have holp Gornay; but
when Heydon sye [_saw_] that we delt so corteysly as we ded he withdrew
hys men and mad hem to go hom a yen, notwithstandyng they wer redy, and
ned had be. And also my Lord of Norffolks men wyll be with hym ayenst me
I wet well as yet, tyl bettyr pesse be.

Item, as for myn ownkyll William, I have spook with hym, and he seyth
that he wyll make a byll in all hast of iche percelle be twyxt yow and
send yow word in wryghtyng how that he wooll dyell with yow; but I can
not se that he besyth hym abowght it, notwithstandyng I calle upon hym
dayly for it. As for mony, I can none get, neyther at Snaylewell nor at
Sporle tyll mydsomer, thow I wold dryve all the catell they have. I was
bond to the shrevys for gren wax[139-1] and for a _fyeri facias_ that is
awardyd owt of yowr lond, wyche drawyth in alle bettyr than v. mark, and
I am fayn to borow the mony to pay it by that Lord I beleve on, for I
cowd not gadyr a nobyll of areragys syn I was with yow at London of alle
the lyvelod ye have. As for John Maryot, he is payid of hys anuyte in to
a nobyll or x_s._ at the most, but as for all hys dettors I can not pay
hem tyll I can gadyr more mony, so God help me. I pray yow send a byll
to John Pampyng that he may ryed with me ovyr all your lyvelood, and tak
a clere reknyng what is owyng and what that I have receyvyd, that ye may
have a cler reknyng of all that ye owe in thys contre, and what your
tenauntes owe yow. Item, I pray yow send me word as hastyly as ye can,
how the world goethe. No more, but God lant yow lansmann,[139-2] and
rather then to stand in dowght, remembyr what peyn it is a man to loese
lyberte. The Flet is a fayir preson, but ye had but smale lyberte ther
in,[139-3] for ye must nedys aper when ye wer callyd. Item, I have fownd
Jamys Greshamys oblygacyon. Item, he comyth to Londonward thys day.

Wretyn the xiiij. day of Maye.

  J. P.

    [Footnote 138-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] What is here said of the
    attempt of Gurney to collect the rents at Saxthorpe, seems to show
    that this letter is of the same year as No. 796. Also the mention
    of Maryot’s annuity and the green wax agrees very well with the
    previous allusion to these matters in No. 797.]

    [Footnote 139-1: _See_ p. 134, Note 2.]

    [Footnote 139-2: So in MS. What does this mean? Compare similar
    expression at p. 133.]

      [[_“similar expression” = “God lant yow myn her” and footnote_]]

    [Footnote 139-3: I have found no other mention of Sir John Paston
    having been imprisoned in the Fleet.]


802

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[139-4]

[Sidenote: 1472 / MAY 25]

Ryght worchefull syr, I recomande me to yow, sertyfying yow that I was
purposyd to have com to London to have made my pese with my Lady of
Norffolk, but I undyrstand she is not in London; notwithstandyng that is
no cause of myn abydyng at hom, but thys is the cause, so God help
me,--I can get no mony, neythyr of your lyvelod ner of myn, to pay for
my costes, nor for to ease yow with at my comyng. Notwithstandyng I am
promysyd som at Snaylewell, and if so be that John can take eny ther, he
shall bryng it yow with this bylle. I send yow here ij. of my reknynges
that I have receyved and payd syn I delt with yowr lyvelod, and by thes
ij. and by that reknyng that I sent yow to London ye may know what is
receyved by me, and what I have payid; and howgh and when so evyr ye
wyll let your tenauntes and fermours at alle plasys be examynd, ye
shalle fynd it non othyr wyse. So God help me, as your lyvelod is payid,
it cannot paye your dettes in thys contre; for it drawyth up on a x_li._
that ye owe yet in thys contre, besyd the xii_li._ to Dawbney; and with
in thes vij. dayis I shall send yow a clere byll what ye owe, for ther
are axyid many thynges that I knewe not of when I was with yow.

Also I enswyr yow by my trowthe I saw my modyr nevyr sorer mevyd with no
mater in hyr lyve then she was when she red the byll that ye gave me
warnyng in that Perker had atainyd an axyon ayenst yow and me, for she
supposyth veryly that it is doon by myn oncyll William meanys, to mak
yow to sell your lond. But thys she comandyd me for to send yow word,
that and ye sell eny lond, but paye your dettes with syche good as my
Lord Archebyshopp owyth yow, and eny law in Inglond can put fro yow eny
of hyr lond, she sweryth by that feyth that she owyth to God she wyll
put fro yow dobyll as myche lond as ye selle. And therfor I wold avyse
yow, calle sharply upon my Lord, the Archebyshop, for ye ar not bond to
undo your sylf for hym.

Item, I pray yow se that I tak no hurt by Parker. As for myn oncyll W.,
I can not mak hym to send you the byll of syche stuff as he hathe of
yowrs. He seyth he woll, but he comyth no of with it.[140-1] He and I ar
fowly fallyn owght thys same day for a mater betwyx Lovell and Johne
Wallsam and hyr sustyr. Lovell hathe bowt Jone Walshamys part of hyr
lyvelod, and maryd hyr to a knave, and myn oncyll W. hathe oft spok with
my modyr and me for to delyver Jone Walshamys evydence to Lovell, whyche
I have in kepyng; and be cause I wyll not delyver Lovell the evydence
therfor we fyll owt, in so myche that he seyth he wyll stryppe me fro
the maner of Sweynsthorpe. Wherfor I pray yow in eny wyse send me by
John Mylsend a copye of the deed that I sent yow to London. Ther is in
the same deed Gresham and Snaylewell, and Sporle and Sweynsthorpe, alle
to gedyr I trow. And I prey yow let the date and the feoffeys namys, and
alle be set in. And I trust to God to mak yt so sewyr that he shall do
me lytyll harm. Gefrey Spyrlyng callyth oft up on me to undyrstand how
ye wyll delle with hym for hys plase in Norwyche. I pray you send me
woord by John what answer I may geve hym; he delyth alwey ryght frendly
with yow.

Item, I send yow here wyth Jamys Greshamys oblygacyon.

Item, I pray yow send serteyn woorde how the world gothe.

Wretyn the xxv. day of May.

  J. P.

  _Endorsed_--John Paston.

    [Footnote 139-4: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter seems to
    have been written in 1472, when, as before observed, the Pastons
    were endeavouring to make peace with the Duke of Norfolk by means
    of the Duchess. The date is confirmed by the reference to James
    Gresham’s obligation at the end. Compare last No. There is no
    address on the back.]

    [Footnote 140-1: So in MS.]


803

MARGARET PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[141-1]

_To Sir John Paston, Knythe, be thys delyverid._

[Sidenote: 1472 / JUNE 5]

I gret zow welle, and send zow Godds blyssyng and myn, latyng zow wet
that I spakke with frends of myn with yne thys fewe days that told me
that I am leke to be trobyld for Sir John Fastolles goodes, the whyche
were in zour fadyrs possessyon, and as for me I had never none of them.
Where fore I pray zow send me a kopy of the dyssecharge whyche ze have
of my Lord of Wynchester that ze told me that ze had, bothe for my
dyscharge and zowyrs wat sum ever that be callyd upon of eyther of us
here after. Item, yt ys told me that Harry Heydon hat bowthe [_bought_]
of the seyd Lord bothe Saxthorpe and Tychewelle, and hathe takke
possessyon there in. We bette the busschysse and have the losse and the
disworschuppe and ether men have the byrds. My Lord hathe falsse
kownselle and sympylle, that avyseythe hym thereto; and as yt ys told
me, Guton ys leke to goo the same wey in hast. And as for Heylysdon and
Drayton, I trow yt is ther yt schalle be. Wat schalle falle of the
remnaunt, God kowythe,--I trow as evelle or whersse. We have the losse
among us. Yt owythe to be remembyrd, and they that be defawty to have
konsyens there in. And so mot I thryve, yt was told me but latte that yt
is seyd in kownselle of them that ben at Caster, that I am leke to have
but lytylle good of Mauteby yf the Duke of Norfolke have possessyon
stylle in Caster; and yf we lesse that, we lesse the fayereste flower of
owr garlond. And ther for helpe that he may be owte of possessyon there
of in haste be myn a vyse, wat so ever fortune here after. Item, yt is
seyde here that my Lord Archebysschoppe is ded; and yf yt be so, calle
up on hys sueretes for the mony that is owyng to us, in hast be myn
avyse; and at reverens of God helpe that I mythe be dyschargyd of the C.
mark that ze wet of, owder be that mene or sum other, for yt is to myche
for me to bere, with other charges that I have besyd, that I am to hevy
wan I thynk up on yt. As for your syster Anne, Master Godfrey and his
wyffe and W. Grey of Martyn, arn up on a powntment with me and your
brother John, so that ze wylle a gre there to and be her good brother;
sche schalle have to joyntor hys modyrs lyvelod after the dyssese of her
and her husbond, and I to pay x_li._ be zere to the fynddyng of her and
her husbond tylle c_li._, be payed. And yf hys grawntsyers lyvelod falle
to hym here after, he hathe promysed to amend her joyntyr. Master
Godfrey hathe promysyd hym for hys parte xl_s._ be zere, and than
lakkythe but iiij. nobyls of xx. mark be zere, the wyche they hope ze
wylle make upe for zour parte. Wylliam Grey told me he schuld speke with
zow here in wan he kam to London thys terme. God kepe zow.

Wretyn in hast on Fryday next after Sen Pernelle.[143-1]

  Be your modyr.

    [Footnote 141-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] It is evident that Henry
    Heydon’s purchase of Saxthorpe, mentioned in this letter, must
    have been subsequent to his support of Gurney in the possession of
    that manor, as mentioned in Letter 801. No doubt the year is the
    same. The letter is endorsed by Sir John ‘Per matrem.’]

    [Footnote 143-1: St. Petronilla the Virgin or St. Pernell. Her day
    was the 31st May.]

  [[God kowythe
  _text unchanged: error for “knowythe”?_

  tylle c_li._, be payed
  _punctuation unchanged_]]


804

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[143-2]

_To my ryght worchepfull brodyr, Sir John Paston, Knyght._

[Sidenote: 1472 / JUNE 5]

Ryght worchepfull sir, I recomand me to yow.[143-3]

.      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .

Item, Mastyr John Smythe tellyth me that Sir T. Lyneys goodys ar not
abyll to paye a quarter of hys detts that be axyd hym; wherfor syche
money as is be left it most be devydyd to every man a parte aftyr the
quantyte, whyche dyvysyon is not yet mad, but when it is mad he hathe
promyseyd me that your part shalbe worthe iij. the best, &c.

Item, as for J. of Barneys hors, whoso have leest need to hym he shall
cost hym xx. marks, not a peny lesse.

Ye send me woord of the maryage of my Lady Jane; one maryage for an
other on, Norse and Bedford were axed in the chyrche on Sonday last
past. As for my syster Anne, my modyr wyll not remeve fro W. Yellverton
for Bedyngfeld, for she hathe comend ferther in that mater, syn ye wer
in this contre, as it aperyth in hyr lettyr that she sendyth yow by
Thyrston.

Tydyngs her, my Lady of Norffolk is with chyld, she wenyth hyrsylf, and
so do all the women abowght hyr, insomyche she waytys the qwyknyng with
in thes vj. wekys at the ferthest. Also W. Gernay wenyth that Heydon is
swyr of Saxthorp, and that Lady Boleyn of Gwton. John Osberne avysythe
yow to take brethe for your wodsale at Sporle, for he hathe cast it,
that it is woorthe as good as ix.^xx._li._ Bewar of Montayn, for he may
not pay yow so moche mony with hys ease.

I prey yow recomand me to Sir John Parre with all my servys, and tell
hym by my trouthe I longyd never sorer to see my Lady than I do to se
hys Mastershepe; and I prey God that he aryse never a mornyng fro my
Lady hys wyff, with owght it be ageyn hyr wyll, tyll syche tyme as he
bryng hyr to Our Lady of Walsyngham.

Also I prey yow to recomand me in my most humbyll wyse unto the good
Lordshepe of the most corteys, gentylest, wysest, kyndest, most
compenabyll, freest, largeest, most bowntesous knyght, my Lord the Erle
of Arran,[144-1] whych hathe maryed the Kyngs sustyr of Scotland. Herto
he is one the lyghtest, delyverst, best spokyn, fayrest archer;
devowghtest, most perfyghte, and trewest to hys lady of all the knyghtys
that ever I was aqweyntyd with; so wold God, my Lady lyekyd me as well
as I do hys person and most knyghtly condycyons, with whom I prey yow to
be aqweyntyd, as yow semyth best; he is lodgyd at the George in Lombard
Street. He hath a book of my syster Annys of the _Sege of Thebes_; when
he hathe doon with it, he promysyd to delyver it yow. I prey lete
Portland bryng the book hom with hym. Portland is loggyd at the George
in Lombard Street also.

  And thys I promyse yow, ye schall not be so longe ayen with ought
  a byll fro me, as ye have ben, thow I shold wryght how ofte the wynd
  changyth, for I se be your wryghtyng ye can be wrothe and ye wyll

  crosse it.
  · + · + · +
  for lytyll.[144-2] Wretyn the v. day of June.
  · + · + · +

  J. PASTON.

    [Footnote 143-2: [From Fenn, ii. 92.] This letter, like the last,
    is dated by the reference to Gurney and Heydon. The date is
    confirmed by the allusion to the proposal to sell Sporle wood.]

    [Footnote 143-3: Here follows an account of some money
    transactions, etc.--F.]

    [Footnote 144-1: Thomas Boyd, Earl of Arran, in 1466, married
    Mary, daughter of James II. and sister of James III., Kings of
    Scotland. He was appointed Regent, but becoming unpopular, was
    banished, and died in exile before 1474.--F.]

    [Footnote 144-2: These two words are crossed as here represented,
    and over them is written, ‘crosse it.’]

  [[Sidenote: 1472 / JUNE 5
  _date supplied from body of letter_]]


805

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[145-1]

_To my ryght worchepfull brodyr, Sir John Paston, Knyght._

[Sidenote: 1472 / JULY 8]

Ryght worchepfull sir, I recomand me to you, sertyfying yow that I have
spokyn wyth Mastyr John Smyth[145-2] for Sir T. Lyndys, and he hathe
shewyd me your byll whyche ye axe to be content of. Your byll a lone
drawyth iiij. mark and ode monye, for ye have set in your byll for wax a
lone xx_s._, whyche to Mastyr John S. imagynacyon, and to all other
ofycers of the coort, shold not drawe past xx_d._ at hys berying. The
bylls that be put into the coorte of Syr Thomas Lynys dettes drawe
xxx_li._ xviij_s._ vj_d._, and all the money that can be mad of hys
house and goodes in this contrey drawyth but v_li._ Mastyr J. Smyth wold
ye shold send hym into the coort an inventory of syche goodys as Syr T.
had at London when he dyeid, and that inventory onys had, ye shall have
as comyth to your part and more also. Ye must send the serteynte whedyr
the wax be xx_s._ or xx_d._; and as for the Freers, Master John wyll not
alowe theym a peny, for he seyth wher the dettes may not be payeid, set
the beqwestes at nowght. He is agreid to pay the potycarye aftyr that he
have the inventory fro yow. Rysyng I trowe hathe be with yow.

Item, as for John Maryot, I have sent to hym for the xl_s._ but I have
non answer.

Item, I have spok with Barker, and he hathe no money, nor non can get
tyll harvest, when he may dystreyn the cropp upon the grownd; he seyth
there is not owyng past v. mark, and on Saturday next comyng he shall
send me a vewe of hys acompte whyche I shall send you as sone as I have
it. As for Fastolffes v. mark, J. Wyndham hathe be spokyn to by me half
a doseyn tymys to send to hym for it, and he seyth he hathe doon so.

Item, Sir John Styll hathe told Jwde when ye shall have the chalys; ax
Jwde of your crwets allso.

Item, the prowd, pevyshe, and evyll disposyd prest to us all, Sir James,
seyth that ye comandyd hym to delyver the book of vij. Sagys to my
brodyr Water, and he hathe it.

Item, I send you the serteynte her with of as myche as can be enqweryd
for myn oncyll W. cleym in Caster; thase artyclys that fayle, the
tenaunts of Caster shall enqwer theym, and send theym to me hastyly;
they have promysyd, and they com, ye shall have theym sent yow by the
next messenger that comyth to London.

Item, my modyr sendyth you woord that she hathe neyther Master Robard
Popyes oblygacyon nor the Byshopys.[146-1]

Item, my modyr wold ye shold in all haste gete hyr aqwetance of the
Byshop[146-2] of Wynchester for Sir John Fastolffes goodes; she preyid
you to make it swyr by the avyse of your consayll, and she wyll pay for
the costes.

Item, she preyith you to spek to the seyd Byshop for to get Master
Clement Felmyngham the viij. mark be yer dwryng hys lyffe that Sir J.
Fastolff be set hym; she preyid you to get hym an asygnement for it to
som maner in Norfolk or in Lothynglond.

Item, she wold ye shold get yow an other house to ley in your stuff
syche as cam fro Caster. She thynkyth on of the Freerys is a fayir
house; she purposeyth to go in to the contre, and ther to sojorn onys
ayen.[146-3] Many qwarellys ar pyekyd to get my brodyr E. and me ought
of hyr howse; we go not to bed unchedyn lyghtly, all that we do is ille
doon, and all that Sir Jamys and Pekok dothe is well doon; Sir Jamys and
I be tweyn. We fyll owght be for my modyr, with ‘Thow prowd prest’ and
‘Thow prowd sqwyer,’ my modyr takyng hys part, so I have almost beshet
the bote, as for my modyrs house; yet somer shal be don or I get me ony
mastyr. My modyr proposeith hastyly to take estate in all hyr londys,
and upon that estate to make hyr wyll of the seyd londys, parte to geve
to my yonger brethyrn for term of ther lyvys, and aftyr to remayn to
yow, pert to my syster Annys maryage,[147-1] tyll on C_li._ be payid,
part for to make hyr ile at Mawtby, parte for a prest to syng for hyr
and my fadyr, and ther ancestrys. And in thys aungyr betwen Sir Jamys
and me, she hathe promyseid me that my parte shall be nowght; what your
shal be, I can not sey. God sped the plowghe; i feythe ye must purvey
for my brodyr E. to go over with you, or he is on don; he wyll bryng xx.
noblys in hys purse. My modyr wyll nowthyr geve nor lend non of you
bothe a peny forward. Purvey a meane to have Caster ayen or ye goo ovyr;
my Lord and Lady (whyche for serteyn is gret with chyld), be wery ther
of, and all the housold also. If ye wyll eny othyr thyn to be don in
thys contre, send me woord, and I shall do as well as I can with Godes
grace, Who preserve yow.

Wretyn the viij. day of Julle. I pray yow recomand me to my Lord of
Aran,[147-2] Sir John Par, Sir George Browne, Osbern Berney, R. Hyd,
Jhoxson my cosyn, hys wyfe Kate, W. Wood, and all. I pray brenne thys
by[ll] for losyng.

  Your,

  J. P.

    [Footnote 145-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] The references to the
    affairs of the deceased Sir Thomas Lynde, the Duchess of Norfolk’s
    pregnancy, and other subjects mentioned in the letter immediately
    preceding, prove clearly that this letter belongs to the same
    year.]

    [Footnote 145-2: Master John Smyth was, at this time, an officer
    in the Bishop’s Court; he became afterwards Chancellor of the
    Diocese of Norwich, and died about 1491.]

    [Footnote 146-1: Walter Lyhert, Bishop of Norwich, from 1445 to
    1472.]

    [Footnote 146-2: William de Wainfleet, Bishop of Winchester from
    1447 to 1486.]

    [Footnote 146-3: Fenn reads ‘onys a yer,’ which may have been
    intended; but I think the true reading is ‘ayen.’]

    [Footnote 147-1: She afterwards married William Yelverton, Esq.]

    [Footnote 147-2: _See_ p. 144, Note 1.]

  [[my syster Annys maryage,[147-1]
  _text reads_
  my syster Annys,[147-1] maryage,]]


806

ABSTRACT[147-3]

[Sidenote: 1472(?)]

A paper endorsed ‘The copy of the request to the Bishop of Winchester by
Sir John Paston, Knight.’

Complains of my Lord not making him an acquittance of 4000 marks which
he has often claimed, etc.

  [Sir John Paston is desired in Letters 796 and 805 to procure from
  the Bishop of Winchester an acquittance for Sir John Fastolf’s goods,
  and this paper may be presumed to be of the same year.]

    [Footnote 147-3: [From MS. Phillipps 9735, No. 271.]]


807

ABSTRACT[148-1]

[Sidenote: 1472 / AUG. 12]

Norf. and Suff. Deeds, No. 63.--‘Relaxatio Willielmi Paston Will.
Wainflete et aliis totius juris in manerio de Caldecots in Freton, in
Akethorp, in Lowestoft, Spitlings in Gorleston, tenementi vocat’ Habland
in Bradwell, et tenementi vocat’ Broweston in eadem villa, et aliis
terris infra hundred de Loddinglond Aug. 12, Edw. IV. 12.’

    [Footnote 148-1: [From MS. Index in Magd. Coll., Oxford.]]


808

JAMES ARBLASTER TO THE BAILIFF OF MALDEN[148-2]

_To my ryght trusty ffrend John Carenton, Baylye of Maldon._

[Sidenote: 1472 / SEPT. 20]

Ryght trusty frend, I comand me to yow, preying yow to call to your mynd
that, lyek as ye and I comonyd of, it were necessary for my Lady and you
all, hyr servaunts and tenaunts, to have thys Parlement as for one of
the burgeys of the towne of Maldon, syche a man of worchep and of wytt
as wer towardys my seyd Lady; and also syche on as is in favor of the
Kyng and of the Lords of hys consayll nyghe abought hys persone.
Sertyfying yow, that my seid Lady for hyr parte, and syche as be of hyr
consayll be most agreeabyll, that bothe ye, and all syche as be hyr
fermors and tenauntys, and wellwyllers, shold geve your voyse to a
worchepfull knyght, and one of my Ladys consayll, Sir John Paston,
whyche standys gretly in favore with my Lord Chamberleyn; and what my
seyd Lord Chamberleyn may do with the Kyng and with all the Lordys of
Inglond, I trowe it be not unknowyn to you most of eny on man alyve.
Wherefor, by the meenys of the seyd Sir John Paston to my seyd Lord
Chamberleyn, bothe my Lady and ye of the towne kowd not have a meeter
man to be for yow in the Perlement, to have your needys sped at all
seasons. Wherfor, I prey yow labor all syche as be my Ladys servauntts,
tenaunts, and wellwyllers, to geve ther voyseys to the seyd Sir John
Paston, and that ye fayle not to sped my Ladys intent in thys mater, as
ye entend to do hyr as gret a plesur, as if ye gave hyr an C_li._ And
God have yow in Hys keping.

Wretyn at Fysheley, the xx. day of Septembyr.

  J. ARBLASTER.

I prey yow be redy with all the acomptanttys belongyng to my Lady, at
the ferthest within viij. dayes next aftyr Perdon Sonday, for then I
shall be with yow with Gods Grace, Who have yow in keepyng.

    [Footnote 148-2: [From Fenn, ii. 98.] The date of this letter is
    ascertained by the reference made to it in that which immediately
    follows it.]


809

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[149-1]

_To my ryght worchepfull brodyr, Sir John Paston, Knyght._

[Sidenote: 1472 / SEPT. 21]

Ryght worchepfull sir, I recomand me to yow, letyng yow wet that your
desyer as for the Knyghts of the Shyer was an impossoybyl to be browght
abowght; ffor my Lord of Norffolk and my Lord of Suffolk wer agreid i
mor then a fortnyght go to have Sir Robert Wyngfeld, and Sir Rychard
Harcort, and that knew I not tyll it was Fryday last past. I had sent or
I rod to Framlynham, to warne as many of your frends to be at Norwyche
as thys Monday, to serve your entent as I koud; but when I cam to
Framlynham, and knew the apoyntment that was taken for the ij. knyghts,
I sent warnyng ayen to as many I myght to tery at hom; and yet ther cam
to Norwyche thys day as many as ther costs dreave to ix_s._ i_d._ ob.,
payid and reknyd by Pekok and R. Capron, and yet they dyd but brak ther
fest and depertyd. And I thankyd hem in your name, and told them that ye
wold have noo voyse as thys day, for ye supposyd not to be in Inglond
when the Perlement shold be, and so they cam not at the sherhous
[_shire-house_]; for if they had, it was thought by syche as be your
frends here, that your adversarys wold have reportyd that ye had mad
labor to have ben one, and that ye koud not bryng your purpose abowght.

I sent to Yermowthe, and they have promysyd also to Doctor Aleyn and
John Russe to be mor then iij. wekys goo.

Jamys Arblaster hathe wretyn a lettyr to the Bayle of Maldon, in Essex,
to have yow a bergeys ther; howe Jwde shall sped, let hym tell yow, when
ye spek to gedyr.

Syr, I have ben twyis at Framlyngham sythe your departyng, but now, the
last time the consayll was ther, I sye [_saw_] yow lettyr whyche was
bettyr then well endyghtyd. R. C.[150-1] was not at Framlyngham when the
consayll was ther, but I took myn owne avyse, and delyvered it to the
consayll with a propocysion ther with, as well as I kowd spek it, and my
wordys wer well takyn, but your lett[yr] a thousand fold bettyr. When
they had red it, they shewd it to my Lady.[150-2] Aftyr that my Lady had
sen it, I spok with my Lady offryng to my Lord and her your servyse, and
besyd that, ye to do my Lord a plesur[150-3] and hyr a bettyr, so as ye
myght depert wyth ought eny some specyfyid. She wold not tell in that
mater, but remyttyd me ayen to the consayll, for she seyd, and she speke
in it, tyll my Lord and the consayll wer agreed, they wold ley the wyght
[_blame_] of all the mater on hyr, whyche shold be reportyd to hyr
shame; but thys she promyseid to be helpyng, so it wer fyrst mevyd by
the consayll. Then I went to the consayll, and offyrd befor them your
servyse to my Lord, and to do hym a plesure, for the haveing ayen of
your place and londys in Caster, xl_li._ not spekyng of your stuff nor
thyng ellys. So they answerd me your offyr was more then resonabyll; and
if the mater wer thers, they seyd, they wyst what conscyence wold dryve
hem to. They seyd they wold meve my Lord with it, and so they dyd, but
then the tempest aros, and he gave hem syche an answer that non of hem
all wold tell it me; but when I axid an answer of them, they seyd, and
[_if_] som Lordys or gretter men mevyd my Lord with it, the mater wer
your (kepe consaile), and with thys answer I depertyd. But Syr W.
Brandon, Sothewell, Tymperley, Herry Wentworthe, W. Gornay, and all
other of consayll, undyrstand that ye have wronge, insomyche that they
mevyd me that ye shold take a recompence of other lond to the valew; but
they wold not avowe the offyr, for I anserd hem that if they had ryght
they wold have ofred no recompence. Dyscovyr not thys, but in my reason,
and [_i.e._ if] my Lord Chamberleyn[151-1] wold send my Lady a letter
with some privy tokyn betwyx theym, and allso to meve my Lord of
Norffolk when he comyth to the Parlement, serteynly Caster is yours.

If ye mysse to be burgeys of Maldon, and my Lord Chamberleyn wyll, ye
may be in a nother plase; ther be a doseyn townys in Inglond that chesse
no bergeys, whyche ought to do, and ye may be set in for one of those
townys, and ye be frendyd. Also in no wyse forget not in all hast to get
some goodly ryng, pryse of xx_s._, or som praty flowyr of the same
pryse, and not undyr, to geve to Jane Rodon, for she hathe ben the most
specyall laborer in your mater, and hathe promysyd hyr good wyll
foorthe, and she doeth all with hyr mastresse. And my Lord Chamberleyn
wyll, he may cause my Lord of Norffolk to com up soner to the Parlement
then he shold do, and then he may apoynt with hym for yow, or the ferm
corn[151-2] be gadryd. I profyrd but xl_li._, and if my Lord Chamberleyn
profyr my Lady the remenaunt, I can thynk it shall be taken. My Lady
must have somwhat to bye hyr kovercheff[151-3] besyd my Lord. A soper
that I payd for, wher all the consayll was at Framlyngham, ij_s._
iij_d._, and my costs at Framlyngham twyis lying ther by viii. dayis,
with ix_s._ i_d._ ob., for costs of the contre at Norwyche drawyth
abowght xx_s._, I trowe more: by our Lady, if it be lesse, stand to
your harmys, and _sic remanet_ v_li._ xiij_s._ iii_d._

I axe no more gods of you for all the servyse that I shall do yow whyll
the world standyth, but a gosshawke,[152-1] if eny of my Lord
Chamberleyns men or yours goo to Kaleys, or if eny be to get in London;
that is, a mewyd hawk, for she may make yow sporte when ye com into
Inglond a doseyn yer hens, and to call upon yow owyrly, nyghtly, dayly,
dyner, soper, for thys hawk. I pray noo more but my brother E.,
J. Pampyng, Thyrston, J. Myryel, W. Pytte, T. Plattyng Jwde, lityll Jak,
Mastyr Botoner, and W. Wood to boote, to whyche persons I prey yow to
comand me; and if all thes lyst to spek to yow of thys mater when Sir
George Browne, W. Knyvett, R. Hyd, or eny folk of worchepp and of my
aqweyntanse be in your compeny, so that they may helpe forthe, for all
is lytyll i nowe, and ye be not very well wyllyng, I shall so pervey for
hem, and ever ye com to Norwyche, and they with yow, that they shall
have as deynte vytayll and as gret plente therof for i_d._ as they shall
have of the tresorer of Caleys for xv_d._, and ye, peraventure, a pye of
Wymondham to boote. Now thynk on me, good Lord, for if I have not an
hawke, I shall wax fatt for default of labor, and ded for default of
company by my trowthe. No more, but I pray God send you all your desyrs,
and me my mwyd gosshawk in hast, or rather then fayle, a sowyr hawke.
Ther is a grosser dwellyng ryght over ayenst the well with ij. boketts a
lytyll fro Seynt Elens, hathe evyr hawkys to sell.

Wretyn at Norwyche the xxj. day of September, Anno E. iiij^ti xij^o.

  J. P.

Rather then faylle, a tarsell provyd wyll occupy the tyme tyll I com to
Caleys.

    [Footnote 149-1: [From Fenn, ii. 102.]]

    [Footnote 150-1: Richard Calle.]

    [Footnote 150-2: Elizabeth, Duchess of Norfolk.]

    [Footnote 150-3: Make him a present.--F.]

    [Footnote 151-1: William, Lord Hastings.]

    [Footnote 151-2: Corn paid in part of rent.--F.]

    [Footnote 151-3: A head-dress, or handkerchief.--F.]

    [Footnote 152-1: From the anxiety here expressed for a hawk, we
    may judge of the attention which was paid to the diversion of
    hawking. Latham, in his book of Falconry, says that a goshawk is
    the first and most esteemed kind of hawk; that a sore hawk is from
    the first taking of her from the eyry till she hath mewed her
    feathers. The tassel, or tiercel, is the male of the goshawk, so
    called because it is a tierce or third less than the female; it
    appears here, that a ‘grosser,’ or dealer in foreign fruits, etc.,
    sold hawks.--F.]

  [[by our Lady, if it be lesse
  _text reads “i it”: corrected from Fenn_

  T. Plattyng, Jwde
  _comma missing or invisible_
  _there is no comma in Fenn, but the name “Plattyng” occurs several
  times_]]


810

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[153-1]

_A Monsieur J. Paston, Chevaller._

[Sidenote: 1472 / OCT. 16]

Ryght worchepfull sir, I comand me to yow, sertyfying yow that Pekok
hath receyvyd of Sir John Stylle by a bylle all suche stuff as he had of
your. And as for Kendallys mater, he hathe doon as myche in it as can be
doon: but as for Richard Calle, he hathe gevyn hym a pleyn answer that
he wyll not seale to the lease that ye have mad to Kendalle, for he
seyth he wottyth not whether it be your wylle or not, notwithstandyng he
sye yore sealle up on it. I wold be sory to delyver hym a subpena and ye
sent it me.

I send you herwith the endenture betwyx yow and Townesend. My modyr
hathe herd of that mater by the reporte of old Wayte, whyche rennyth on
it with opyn mowthe in hys werst wyse. My modyr wepyth and takyth on
mervaylously, for she seythe she wotyth well it shall never be pledgyd
ought; wherfor she seythe that she wyll purvey for hyr lond that ye
shall none selle of it, for she thynkys ye wold and it cam to yowr hand.
As for hyr wyll and all syche maters as wer in hand at your last being
here, they thynk that it shall not lye in all oure porys to let it in on
poynt.

Sir Jamys is evyr choppyng at me, when my modyr is present, with syche
wordys as he thynkys wrathe me, and also cause my modyr to be dyspleased
with me, evyn as who seyth he wold I wyst that he settyth not by the
best of us; and when he hathe most unfyttyng woordys to me, I smylle a
lytyll and tell hym it is good heryng of thes old talys. Sir Jamys is
parson of Stokysby by J. Bernays gyft. I trowe he beryth hym the hyeer.

Item, ye must sende in haste to W. Barker a warrant to pay John Kook
xxx_s._, and to the woman of Yermothe for otys xx., and Syr John Styll
hys money, for they call dayly up on it.

Item, I prey yow send me some tydynges howgh the world gothe, and
whether ye have sent eny of your folk to Caleys. Me thynkes it costyth
yow to myche money for to kepe hem all in London at your charge.

Item, whethyr ye have eny thyng spokyn of my going to Caleys.

Item, as for a goshawk or a terssell, I wend to have had on of yours in
kepyng or thys tyme, but fere [_far_] fro iee fer fro hert; by my
trowthe I dye for defawlt of labore. And it may be by eny meane
possybyll, for Godes sake let on be sent me in all hast; for if it be
not had by Halowmess, the seson shall passe a non, _Memento mei_, and in
feythe ye shall not loose on it. Nor yet myche wyne on it by God, Who
preserve yow.

Wretyn on Seynt Mychell Day, in Monte Tomba.[154-1]

  J. P.

    [Footnote 153-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] The date of this letter
    is shown by a contemporaneous endorsement ‘Anno E. iiij^ti xij^o,’
    as well as by the repetition of the writer’s request for a
    goshawk.]

    [Footnote 154-1: The feast of St. Michael in Monte Tumba was the
    16th October.]


811

MARGARET PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[154-2]

_To John Paston, esquyer._

[Sidenote: 1472(?) / OCT. [23]]

I grete you wele; letyng you wete that on Saterday last past within
nyght the felesshep at Cayster tokyn ought of Mawtby Cloos xvj. shep of
diverse mennes that were put therein to pasture, and thei ledde them a
wey, so that every man ferith to put any bestis or catell therin, to my
grete hurt and discoragyng of my fermour that is now of late come
theder. And the seid evill disposed persones affraid my seid fermour as
he came from Yarmoth this weke and shotte at hym that if he had not had
a good hors he had belike to have ben in joparte of his lyfe; so that be
thes rewle I am like to lese the profite of the lyfelode this yere but
if there be purveyed the hastyere remedy. Thei threte so my men I dar
send non theder to gader it. Thei stuffe and vetayll sore the place, and
it is reported here that my Lady of Norffolk seth she wull not leas it
in no wyse. And the Duchesse of Suffolkis men sey that she wull not
departe from Heylesdon ner Drayton,--she wuld rather departe from money;
but that shuld not be wurchepfull for you; for men shull not than set be
you. There for I will avyse you to have rather the lyvelod than the
money; ye shall mown excuse you be the College which must contynue
perpetuall, and money is sone lost and spent whan that lyfelode abideth.
Item, I lete you wete that Hastyngis hath entred ageyn in to his fee of
the Constabyllshep of the Castell of Norwich be the vertu of his patent
that he had of Kyng Harry; and I here sey he hath it graunted to hym and
his heyeris. There was at his entres your unkill William and other
jentilmen dwellyng in Norwich. This was do be fore that ye sent me the
letter be Pers I had forgetyn to have sent you word ther of. God kepe
you. Wretyn the Friday next after Sent Luke.

  Be your moder.

    [Footnote 154-2: [Add. MS. 34,889, f. 108.] This letter was
    clearly written between the surrender of Caister in 1469 and its
    recovery by Sir John Paston after the death of the Duke of Norfolk
    in 1476. The year 1472 may be considered very probable from what
    Margaret Paston writes in June of that year (No. 803).]


812

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[155-1]

_A Johan Paston, Esquyer, soit done._

[Sidenote: 1472 / NOV. 4]

Worshypfull and weell belovyd brother, I recomand me to yow, letyng yow
weet that I sente yow a letter and a rynge with a dyamond, in whyche
letter ye myght well conceyve what I wold ye scholde do with the same
rynge, with menye other tydyngs and thyngs whyche I prayed yowe to have
doon for me, whyche letter Botoner[156-1] had the beryng off. It is so
nowe that I undrestond that he is owther deed or ellys harde eskapyd,
wheroff I am ryght hevye, and am not serteyn whethyr the seyd lettyr and
rynge come to yowr handys or nott. I wolde nott that letter wer seyn
with some folkys; wherffor I praye yow take good heede hoghe that letter
comythe to yowr handys, hooll or brokyn, and in especiall I praye yow
gete it, iff ye have it nott.

Also I praye yow feele my Lady off Norfolks dysposicion to me wards, and
whethyr she toke any dysplesur at my langage, or mokkyd, or dysdeyned my
words whyche I hadd to hyr at Yarmothe, be twyen the place wher I ffyrst
mett with hyr and hyr lodgyng, ffor my Lady Brandon and Syr
William[156-2] also axhyd me what words I had had to hyr at that tyme.
They seyd that my Lady seyde I gaff hyr ther off,[156-3] and that I
sholde have seyde that my Lady was worthye to have a Lords soon in hyr
belye, ffor she cowde cheryshe itt, and dele warlye with it; in trowthe
owther the same or words moche lyke I had to hyr, whyche wordys I ment
as I seyde. They seye to that I seyde she toke hyr ease. Also I scholde
have seyde that my Ladye was off satur [_stature_] goode, and had sydes
longe and large, so that I was in goode hope she sholde ber a fayr
chylde; he was nott lacyd nor bracyd ine to hys peyn, but that she left
hym rome to pleye hym in. And they seye that I seyde my Lady was large
and grete, and that itt sholde have rome inow to goo owt att; and thus
whyther my Lady mokk me, or theye, I woote nott. I mente weell by my
trowthe to hyr, and to that she is with, as any he that owythe heer best
wyll in Ingelond.

Iff ye can by any meed weete whethyr my Ladye take it to dysplesur or
nowt, or whether she thynke I mokkyd hyr, or iff she wyght it but
lewdnesse off my selffe, I pray yow sende me worde; ffor I weet nott
whethyr I maye trust thys Lady Brandon or nott.

Item, as ffor tydyngs nowe, heer be but ffewe, saff that, as I
undrestande, imbassators off Bretayne shall come to London to morawe,
and men seye that the Lorde Ryverse[157-1] and Scayls, shall hastelye
come home; and men seye that ther is many off the sowders that went to
hym into Bretayne been dede off the fflyxe, and other ipedemye
[_epidemics_], and that the remenant sholde come hom with the Lorde
Skalys. And som seye that thees imbassators come ffor moor men. And thys
daye rennyth a tale that the Duke of Bretayne[157-2] sholde be ded.
I beleeff it not.

I sent yow worde off an hawke; I herde nott from yow syns; I do and
shall doo that is possible in suche a neede.

Also I canne nott undrestand that my Lord off Norffolk shall come heer
thys tyme; wherffor I am in a greet agonye howe is best ffor me to sue
to hym ffor rehavyng off my place; that goode Lorde weet full lytell how
moche harme he doothe me, and how lytell goode or worshyp it dothe hym.
I praye yow sende me yowr advyce. No moor to yow at thys tyme, but God
have yow in Hys kepyng.

Wretyn at London the iiij. daye off Novembre, anno E. iiij^ti xij^{o}.
I feer me that idelnesse ledyth yowr reyne; I praye yow rather remembre
Sir Hughe Levernoys tyll yowr hauke come.

  JOHN PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 155-1: [From Fenn, ii. 112.]]

    [Footnote 156-1: William Botoner, otherwise Worcester. He
    certainly was alive some years later than this.]

    [Footnote 156-2: Sir William Brandon, Knight, was standard-bearer
    to the Earl of Richmond, and was slain in Bosworth Field by
    Richard III. He was father to Charles Brandon, Duke of
    Suffolk.--F.]

    [Footnote 156-3: Meaning apparently, as Fenn suggests, ‘I paid her
    off, or treated her with unceremonious language.’]

    [Footnote 157-1: Anthony Woodville, Earl Rivers, etc., went to
    endeavour to obtain the possession of the Earls of Pembroke and
    Richmond, who were detained as prisoners by the Duke of
    Brittany.--F.]

    [Footnote 157-2: Francis II., the last Duke of Brittany, was born
    in 1435, and died in 1488.--F.]


813

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[158-1]

_A John Paston, Esquyer, soyt done._

[Sidenote: 1472 / NOV. 8]

Brother, I comend me to yow, letyng yow weet, &c.[158-2]

As for the delyverance off the rynge to Mestresse Jane Rothone, I dowt
nott but it shall be doon in the best wyse, so that ye shall geet me a
thank moor than the rynge and I ar worthe or deserve.

And wheer ye goo to my Laydy off Norffolk, and wyll be theer att the
takyng off hyr chambre, I praye God spede yow, and our Ladye hyr, to hyr
plesur, with as easye labor to overkome that she is abowt, as evyr had
any lady or gentyllwoman, saff our Lady heer selffe, and soo I hope she
shall to hyr greet joye, and all owres; and I prey God it maye be lyke
hyr in worship, wytt, gentylnesse, and every thynge excepte the verry
verry thynge.[158-3]

No moor to yow at [this] thyme, but I woll sleepe an howr the lenger
to-morrow by cawse I wrote so longe and late to nyght.

Wretyn betwen the viij. and the jx. daye off Novembre anno xij^o E.
iiij^{ti}.

  J. P., K.

    [Footnote 158-1: [From Fenn, ii. 118.]]

    [Footnote 158-2: The first part of this letter treats of some
    money transactions of no consequence, etc.--F.]

    [Footnote 158-3: Fenn, in his modernised text, makes this ‘except
    the sex.’]

  [[every thynge excepte the verry verry thynge.
  _text unchanged: duplication at line break, but Fenn has the same
  text at mid-line_]]


814

MARGARET PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[159-1]

_To John Paston, Esquyer._

[Sidenote: 1472 / NOV. 19]

I grete you wele and send you Goddes blyssyng and myn, letyng you wete
that I have sent to Doctor Aleyn wyffe to have spoke with her as ye
desired me, and she was so syke that she myght not comyn; but she sent
her broder elaw to me, and I lete hym wete the cause why that I wuld
have spoke with her as ye desired me. And he told me that he shuld have
brought me wrytyng this day from her be vij. of the belle, how that she
wull that ye shuld have labored or do for her; but he came no mor at me.
Nevertherlesse she sent me an nother massenger, and lete me wete[159-2]
that her husband had sent her the same nyght from London that she shuld
come up as fast as she cowde to labor to the Lordes there in her propre
person; wherfor she myght geve me non answer, ner send you word how that
ye shuld do till [that] she had spokyn with her husband, or had other
writyng from hym.

Therfore I thynk t[hat s]he hath other councell that avyseth her to
labour to other than to you. I wuld not that [you be] to besy in no such
maters [ty]ll the werd [_world_] were mor suer, and in any wyse that
w[hile my] Lord the Chaunceller is in [occu]pation, labore to have an
ende of your grete materes and . . . macion, and abide not up [on] trost
of an nother seson, for so shall ye be disseyved a[s ye hav]e ben befor
this tyme. I have understand sith that ye departed that ther . . . . .
mad to subplant you; therfore, for Goddes sake, in this onstabill werd
[_world_] labore er[nestly your] maters that thei may have summe good
conclusion, and that shall make y[our enemies] fere you, and elles thei
shall . . kepe you low and in trobill. And if any mater . . . . . be Act
of Parlement and pro . . . . . lete your bill be mad redy, and lese not
your [ma]teres for other mennes; for if your elmyse [_enemies_] may
profight now at this tyme, ye shall be [in] wers case than ever ye were
befor. All the cou[ntry] wenyth that ye shuld now overcomyn all your
trobill, which if ye do not ye shall fall o[ug]ht of conceyte. I write
as well this to your brother as to you; therfore lete no diffaught be in
you nowther.

Item, it was lete me to wete syth ye departed of such as were your
frendes and were conversaunte with the toder parte that ther was mad
labor and like to be concluded, that the eleccion of the knyghtes of the
shire shuld be chaunged, and new certificat mad and John Jenney set
there in; ther for do your devoir to understond the trought as sone as
ye can, for the seid Jenney this day rideth up to London ward, and I
suppo[se be]cause of the same. I pray you remembre your brother to send
me the evydence and remembrance towchyng the maner of Gresham, which
that I wrote to hym be Juddy, and send them be sum suer man.

Item, take hede to the labour of your unkyll, for he hath had right
straunge langage of your brother of late to right wurchepfull persones;
therfor werk wysely and bewar wham that ye lete know your councell.

Item, remembre Lomnors mater as ye may do therin, and send me werd in
hast. Mayster Roos shall be at London the next weke; therfore ye shall
not nede to make my Lord to write, but whan that he comyth, if my Lord
can make hym to put it in indifferent and wurchepfull men, than that it
pleasith my Lord to write to them that thei shuld take it upon them to
set a rewle therin, with ought better advyse, me semyth it wer wele do.
The Holy Gost be your gyde and send yow good spede and councell, and
delivere you ought of all trobill and disseas to his pleser.

Wretyn the Thursday next be for Sent Kateryn,[160-1] in hast.

Recomaund me to my Mastres Kateryn, and send me werd how ye don, &c.

  Be your Moder.

Do my Lord[161-1] on Sonday send for the shereffes debute [_deputy_] to
wete how thei be disposid for certificate of the knyghtes, and I shall
understand if thei be eschaunged; for on Sonday at nyght, or on Monday,
it shall be put in, and [if i]t is put in, ther is no remedy. Geney seth
he wull attempt the law therin.

    [Footnote 159-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] From the time of year
    and other circumstances, it seems probable that the election here
    referred to was that of the year 1472. A circumstance which
    confirms this date will be found noticed in a footnote. The
    original letter is mutilated in the middle by the decay of the
    paper, in more than one place.]

    [Footnote 159-2: The words after ‘Neverthelesse’ originally stood
    ‘her seid brother-in-law told me that tyme that he was with me,’
    but are crossed out.]

    [Footnote 160-1: St. Catherine’s Day is the 25th of November.]

    [Footnote 161-1: The Duke of Norfolk. It will be seen by the
    preceding letter that John Paston was going to Framlingham in the
    beginning of November 1472.]

  [[Footnote 159-2 and body text:
  Nevertherlesse she sent me an nother massenger ...
  The words after ‘Neverthelesse’ ...
  _mismatched spelling unchanged_

  ... in this onstabill werd [_world_] labore
  _italic “d” misprinted as “a”_]]


815

SIR JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[161-2]

_To Mestresse Margret Paston, or to John Paston, Esquier, or to Roose
dwyllyng affor ther gate, to delyver to them._

[Sidenote: 1472 / NOV. 22]

Please it yow to weete that I have opteyned letterys from the Kynge to
my Lorde off Norffolke, to my Lady of Norffolk, and to ther concell,
whyche letter to ther concell is nott superscrybyd, for cawse we wyst
nott serteyn whyche of the councell sholde be present when the massenger
cowme. I therffor thynke that thoos namys most be somwhatt by yowr
advyce; and for get nott Gornaye, nor yitt Brome, iff ye thynke so best,
nor Sowthewelle. I trust to my cosyn Gornaye, and on to Brome and
Barnard in cheffe; and as to Bernarde, brother, I praye yow to take hys
advyce, for I hope he is my welwyller, as ye know, and iffe he do me
perffyght ease in thys mater, I thynke verrely in tyme to come to gyff
him xx. scutys, and yit a goode turne whan so ever it lythe in my power.

The Kynge hathe specially doon for me in thys case, and hathe pitte me,
and so have the Lordys, in ryght greete comfort, that iff thys fayle,
that I shalle have ondelayed justyce; and he hathe sente a man of
worship and in greet favor with hym on thys massage, whyche hathe nott
ofte ben seyne, whyche gentylman kan well do hys mastrys massage and
brynge trywe reporte. I have gevyn hym v_li._ for hys costes: God sende
hym and yow goode spede in thees werkes. I feer thatt he shall nott
speke with my Lady, for that she hathe takyn hyr chambre. Iff she be my
verry goode Ladye, as she hathe seyde hertoffor that she wolde be,
I hope that she wolle speke with hym. Neverthelesse I praye yow by the
meanes of Mestresse Jahne Rothen that [you][162-1] will have my Ladye
mevyd for me, and wher that herr to fore I wolde have departyd with C.
marke to have hadde hyr goode helpe and to be restoryd to my place;
whyche nott acceptyd, I tolde my seyde Lady that I feeryd that my power
sholde natt be ther aftre to gyff so large a plesyr, for at that tyme I
was in hope that the Bysshop of Wynchester sholde have payd it, thoghe
it hadde drawen a C_li._ Yet for as moche as men may nott lure none
hawkes with empty handys, I wolde yitt agre to gyffe my Lady xx_li._ for
an horse and a sadell, so that I be restoryd to my place, and that
doone, to have a relesse of my Lorde, and my gounes and bokes to be
restoryd, iff it maye bee. Neverthelesse thys mony is nott yit redy with
me. I remytte thys to yowr dyscressyons.

Item, iff it be soo that itt be thowte behovefull, I thynke that thoghe
nowther Slyfelde, nor ye, brother John, maye come in to my Ladyes
chambre, that my moodre, iff she weer at Norwyche, she myght speke with
hyr, for that she is a woman and off worshyppe. I thynke that my moodre
sholde meve my Lady moche. I thynke that ther most be some body for me,
havyng auctoryte to conclude for me, or ellys knowyng myn entente, they
myght make delaye, and seye they wolle at the Kynges enstance comon with
me; never the lesse I was nott ther present. Wherffor, rather than
fayle, yff neede be, I wolle with owte any abode, iff I heer from yow,
come home; and Slyfelde is agreyd to tary the a vij. nyghte for my sake,
so that the mater take effecte. I praye yow make hym goode cheer, and
iff it be so that he tarye, I most remembre hys costes; therffor iff I
shall be sent for, and he tery at Norwyche ther whylys, it wer best to
sette hys horse at the Maydes Hedde, and I shalle content for ther
expences.

Item, ye maye largely sey on my behalve for suche servyse that I sholde
do to my Lorde and Lady hereaffter, whyche by my trowthe I thynke to
doo; neverthelesse to sey that I woll be hys sworyn man, I was never
yitt Lordys sworyn man, yit have I doone goode servyce, and nott leffte
any at hys most neede ner for feer. But as Gode helpe me, I thynke my
Lady shalle have my servyce above any lady erthely, wheche she scholde
weell have knowyn, had I been in suche case as I hadde nott been alweye
the werse welkome; for that on of my herandes alweye was undrestande
that it was for Caster, wnyche was nott acceptable, and I evyr the werse
welkome.

Item, brother, I ame concludyd with my Lorde for yow, that ye shalle be
at Caleys if ye list, and have iij. men in wages undre yow, wheroff my
Lorde seythe that William Lovedaye most be on, tyll tyme that he have
purveyed other rome for hym. Iff ye be dysposyd to goo, as I tolde hym
that ye weer, yett wer it nott best that ye lete it be knowe tyll thys
mater be doone, and then ye maye acordyng to yowr promyse lete my Ladye
have knowleche ther off. Never the lesse my Lorde shalle be here with in
xx. dayes or ther abowt; iff ye come thys weye ye maye speke with hym;
neverthelesse ye shall nott lose no tyme, iff ye weer at Caleys at thys
owr, for my Lorde promysed me that he wolde wryght to Elkenhed the
tresorer at Caleys for yow by the next massenger thatt went.

Item, ther hathe Perauntes wyffe wryte to me that Bernaye servyth hyr
onkyndely. He owythe hyr xxxij_s._ and she is in noon hope that evyr he
will come ther ageyn; sende me worde iff he wyll. He shall nott lyf so
weell and trywly to geedre, I trowe, but iffe he goo thyddre.

I hadde comen home, butt that I ame nott yitt verrely purveyd for
payment for my oncle William the xxvj. daye of thys monythe, and he
dothe me harme. He delythe so oncurteysly with Towneshende, for he wille
nott yitt paye hym the C. marke, payable at Halowmesse, whyche he hadde
a monythe affore; wherffor I feer that Towneshende wille nott do for me
ageyn. I shall doo as I kan.

Wretyn on Sondaye next Seynt Clement.

  JOHN PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 161-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] In this letter, as in
    the last, allusion is made to the visit paid by John Paston to the
    Duchess of Norfolk in November 1472.]

    [Footnote 162-1: Omitted in MS.]

  [[Slyfelde is agreyd to tary the a vij. nyghte
  _text unchanged: error for “ther(e)”?_

  Footnote 162-1:
  Omitted in MS.
  _final . missing or invisible_]]


816

MARGARET PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[164-1]

_To John Paston, Esquyer, be this delivered._

[Sidenote: 1472 / NOV. 23]

I grete you wele, letyng you wete that Doctor Aleyns wyffe hath be with
me and desired me to write to you to desire you to be good mayster to
her husband and to her in her materes, for she tellith me that her trost
is full in you, and if she myght have walked she shuld have come to have
spoke with you or than ye departed; therfor, I pray you do your devoir
for her, for I conceyve that she feyneth not, notwithstandyng that I had
her in suspecion as I have wretyn to you before, be cause that she came
not, but I conceyve now the trought and that sikenesse caused thatt she
absent her. Therfore I pray you help her, for, so God help me, I have
right gret pete on her, and it is right grete almes to help her, and I
trow she wull put her most trost and sewe specialle to you. Also I wuld
ye shold desire your brother to be good mayster on to her, for I suppose
be that tyme ye have herd her excuse in such materes as he shuld be
displeased with her husband, ye shall hold you pleased. God kepe you and
send you Hes blyssyng, with myn. Wretyn on Sent Clementes Day at nyght,
in hast,

  Be your Moder.

    [Footnote 164-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] It is evident that this
    letter was written in the same year as No. 814.]


817

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[165-1]

_To Master Sir John Paston, Knyght._

[Sidenote: 1472 / NOV. 24]

Ryght worchepfull syr, I recomand me to yow, thankyng yow most hertly of
your dylygence and cost whyche ye had in gettyng of the hawk, whyche ye
sent me, for well I wot your labore and trowbyll in that mater was as
myche as thow she had ben the best of the world; but, so God help me, as
ferforthe as the most conyng estragers [_falconers_] that ever I spak
with can imagyn, she shall never serve but to ley eggys, for she is
bothe a mwer de haye, and also she hathe ben so brooseid with cariage of
fewle that she is as good as lame in boothe hyr leggys, as every man may
se at iee. Wherfor all syche folk as have seen hyr avyse me to cast hyr
in to some wood, wher as I wyll have hyr to eyer [_lay eggs_]; but I
wyll do ther in as ye wyll, whedyr ye wyll I send hyr yow ayen, or cast
hyr in Thorpe wood and a tarsell with hyr, for I weit wher on is. But
now I dar no more put yow to the cost of an hawke, but, for Godes sake,
and ther be eny tersell or good chep goshawk that myght be gotyn, that
the berer herof may have hyr to bryng me, and I ensuer yow be my trowthe
ye shall have Dollys and Browne bonde to paye yow at Kandyllmas the
pryse of the hawke. Now, and ye have as many ladyse as ye wer wont to
have, I reqwere yow for hyr sake that ye best love of theym all, onys
trowbyll yowr syllf for me in thys mater, and be owght of my clamor.

Item, as for the ryng, it is delyverd, but I had as gret peyn to make
hyr take it as ever I had in syche a mater; but I have promyseid yow to
be hyr knyght, and she hathe promyseid me to be more at your comandment
then at eny knyghtes in Inglond, my Lord reservyd; and that ye shall
well undyrstand, if ye have owght to do, wherin she may be an helper;
for ther was never knyght dyd so myche cost on hyr as ye have doon.

I mervyall that I her no woord of the lettyrs that my Lord Chamberleyn
shold send to my Lord and my Lady for Caster. It is best that my Lord
Chamberleyn wryght to my Lady by som prevy tokyn betwyx theym, and let a
man of hys com with the lettrys. My Lord Chamberleyn may speed with my
Lady what maters he wyll, savyng the gret mater; and if ye inbyll me for
a solysitor, I shal be _a vouster comandment a touz jours_.

Item, me thynkyth that ye do evyll that ye go not thorewgh with my Lady
of Suffolk for Heylysdon and Drayton; for ther shold growe mony to you,
whyche wold qwyte yow ayenst R. T. and all other, and set yow befor for
ever.

I prey yow for your ease, and all others to you ward, plye thes maters.
As for alle other thynges, I shall send yow an answer, when I com to
Norwyche, whyche shall be on Thorsday, with Godes grace. I have teryd
her at Framlyngham thys sevennyght, for [my] Lady took not hyr chambyr
tyll yersterday. Adewe.

Wretyn on Seynt Kateryns Evyn.

  J. P.

[166-1]I sye the pye, and herd it spek; and, be God, it is not worthe a
crowe; it is fer wers then ye wend; be God, it wer shame to kep it in a
cage.

    [Footnote 165-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] At the foot of this
    letter is written, in a different but contemporary hand, ‘A^o E.
    iiij^ti xij^{o}.’ The date is besides abundantly evident from other
    circumstances.]

    [Footnote 166-1: This _P.S._ is written on the back of the
    letter.]


818

ABSTRACT[166-2]

[Sidenote: 1472 / NOV. 26]

‘Soutwerk cum membris,’ No. 17a.--‘Literæ patentes concessæ a Rege ad
petitionem Domini Fundatoris pro ponte fiendo in vico vocato le
Bermoseystret. Dat. 26 Novembris anno regni Regis Ed. IV. 12^{o}.’

    [Footnote 166-2: [From MS. Index in Magd. Coll., Oxford.]]


819

JOHN OSBERN TO SIR JOHN PASTON[167-1]

_To the right worshepfull my master, Sir John Paston, Knyght._

A^o xij. E. R. quarti.

[Sidenote: 1472]

Please it your masterschep to knowe that Johon Shawe and I have goten a
carpenter fro Walsyngham to Sporle to valewe your wod the[167-2] the
wheche carpenter hese costis there Sondaye at nyght next before the
Assencion off owre Lord Jesu Cryst, Mondaye, Tewesdaye, Wednesdaye,
Assencion Daye, Frydaye and Saterdaye, and for hese labor iij_s._
iiij_d._ And upon the syte of your seid wode he hath valewid the launde
wythin the dykes xij. fote inward fro the cop of the dyke and wythowte
at liiij_li._ vij_s._ x_d._ And wythin the wode xij. fote wythin alle
the dykes vj^xx._li._ vij_s._ viij_d._ the valewe of the dykes abowte
the woode fro xij. fote fro wythin owtewardis arn prysid at x_li._ grete
chepis the valew of the trees in the maner and in the closes azens the
seid manor toward Swaffham xx. marc gret chepe; there off be ware and be
not to hasty, &c., the cloos at the tow . . . toward Pykenham not
valewid nor not spoken of, &c. The summa totall ix^xx._li._ & xviij_li._
ij_s._ viij_d._

And if ze shuld selle all this wode togedyr for redy sylver never lesse
in the summa paste v. marc, if ze woll sell the wode . . . . . the
lawnde wythin the dykes and the standardis thoo I shall wryte aftyr in
this bille for to stande in any wyse less . . . . . . all the hole sum
at the most paste x_li._ for who so ever shall by it he maye so leve and
gete goode, &c.

The summa of your standardis for certeyn reconyd the Mondaye and the
Tewsdaye whill I was at Sporle wyth in . . . . . and xij. fote wythin
the dykes in forme above rehersid xj^xx. And iche standarde a zard
[_yard_] above the grownde . . . . . abowte an . . lesser till we come
xij. inche and viij. inche besyde all odyr smale that arn of lesse
mesure . . . . . . growe the wheche arn many and resonabely sufficient,
&c., the nowmber off the standardis wythin your . . . . . cowntid and
summe be estimacion of the mesures and formes above rehersid CCCC^ma
xxxvj^ti.

As for your undyrwode I can not fynde the meane to valewid to your
avayle, be cause it were necessary to knowe the purpose off your
fellyng, where off beware, &c.

As for the fensyng of your dykes, and ze shuld felle your bordorys off
your wode the Suthsyde, viz., toward Pykenham fro the Wonges to
Walsyngham Weye is lxxx. rodde at leste, the price of the rodde
iiij_d._, dyggyng, plashyng, and heggyng.
    Summa, xxvj_s._ viij_d._

  The Est syde toward Neyghton and Sparham vij^xx. rodde at the leste,
    Summa, xl_s._

  The Northende toward Dunham lxxx. rodde,
    Summa, xxvj_s._ viij_d._

  The West syde toward Sporle be the Loyes vj^xx. rodde,
    Summa, xl_s._

  Summa, vj_li._ xiij_s._ iiij_d._

Where off sum is repayrid, sum maye be sperid, but at the lest it woll
coste yow a vj. marc, &c.

If it please yow to take myn symple avyse in your wode sale, selle non
in gret, but make fagottes and astell and lete alle your grete and goode
tymber and trees stande, and ze shall make resonably mony to your
worchep, and to your best avayle as John Shawe your servaunt shall telle
yow, if I maye do zow any service in this c . . . . ze shall ffynde me
redy, so that ze sende sufficient warant be the grace off Jesu, Who haue
y[ow in His] kepyng. Wrete in hast, at Walsyngham, the Sundaye next
aftyr the feest off the Assencion off owr [Lord] Jesu Cryste.

  Be your

  JOHN OSBERN.

I praye yow geff credens in alle these materes to Shawe, for he can
telle yow more shortlyer then I shuld wryte, and I hold hym trewe to yow
in hese menyng.

  _Endorsed_--Per John Osbern, pro Sporl Wood.

    [Footnote 167-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]

    [Footnote 167-2: _Sic_, _qu._ ‘there’?]


820

RICHARD CALLE TO MARGARET PASTON[168-1]

_To the ryght reverent and worshipffull my mastres, Margaret Paston, in
haste._

[Sidenote: 1472 / NOV. 27]

Plesith it you to wete that I have receyved your letter, wherin I
conceyve ye wolde undrestonde how I do with the sale of Sporle Wode. It
is so that I have begonne to felle asshe at the townes ende for to sette
the contre on werke, and be that I shall undrestonde how the remnaunt
wol doo. I have sette suche a classe [_glass_] before here ien [_their
eyes_] ther, that they are madde upon it, so that I truste be Ester to
make of money, what with the barke and with the asshe, at the leest l.
marke for to retayle the wode our selfe, and be Cristemas next after
that, other l. marke, and so yerely l. marke at Cristemesse as longe as
the wode lasteth, to the some that I tolde you, and I truste more; and
to this I durste be bound. Nevertheles, I am a bowte to selle it all a
grete and to brynge it to all moste to as goode proffe as thowe we
retayled it oure silffe, for it is so that ther is a man of Carbroke,
they calle hym Saunders, I may have of hym for all the wode and barke
that is in Sporle xj^xx. marke, to paye at suche dayes a fore reherseyd,
we to bere the costes of the fense and of the tithe; but we are not
throw yet, nor nought shal be tille I have worde from you a yene, weche
I must have be Sonday come sevenyte at the fertheste, for on the
Wednesdaye nexte after that we shal mete a yene at Sporle. Wherfore I
beseche you sende me your avice how ye thynke herein, and I shal doo
that in me is be Godes grace; if I can do better with hym I shall. It
shal be harde werke, but if I haunse hym som what, for ther is moche
money be twix us, and therfore spare not to sende my master, Sir John,
worde to take suche dayes of payment as is a bove wreten, for it shalbe
performed what wey som ever we take be Godes grace.

Item, mastres, as for your write [_wright_] ye may not have hym tille
after Cristemas, for he had taken an howse to make while I was with you,
it wolbe this iij. wekes yet or then he make an ende, &c.

Item, I mette with Robert at Heythe of Matelaske at Norwiche, when I
come from you. I felle on hande with hym for Matelaske Kerre, I myght
have had of hym for that vij. marke and xx_d._ Dele nogh as ye thynke.

Item, as for money of the fermour of Sporle, he telles me he is bounde
to Tounesende to pay hym at this Candelmesse. And he seythe if he may be
discharged a yenst hym your money shalbe redy at hys daye, be Godes
grace, Who have you in His blissed kepyng.

Wreten at Sporle, the Friday next after Seint Edmund the Kynge.

  Your servaunt,

  R. CALLE.

    [Footnote 168-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] It is evident that this
    letter must have been written some time after the preceding, but
    very probably in the same year.]


821

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[169-1]

_To Sir John Paston, Knyght._

[Sidenote: 1472 / NOV. or DEC.]

Syme recomandyth hym to your good mastyrshep, and preyeth yow that ye
wyll not forget, though he be a boye, to let hym were the same lyvere
that your men do; and if it pleased yow to lete hys gowne clothe be sent
hym home, that it myght be mad ayenst your comeing in to thys contre, he
wold be as prowd as eny man ye have. Sir, as hertly as I can, I thank
yow for the hatt, whyche is comyng, as I undyrstand by your wrytyng,
sent by John, the Abottys man of Seynt Benet.

My modyr sendys you Godes blyssyng and hyrs, and preyes yow to get a new
lycence of my Lord of Norwyche that she may have the sacrement in hyr
chapell. I gat a lycence of hym for a yere, and it is nyghe woryn ought.
Ye may get it for the Byshoppys lyve, and ye wylle.

As for the lettyrs that Slyfeld shold get newe of the Kyng, whyche ye
shold bryng to my Lord of Norffolk, it is myn avyse that ye shall come
home your sylff as hasty ly as ye maye, so that ye may be at the
crystenyng of the chyld that my Lady is with; it shall cause yow gret
thank, and a gret fordell [_advantage_] in your mater. And as for the
lettres, leve a man of yowr to awayte on Slyfeld to bryng theym after
yow; of whyche lettres I avyse yow to have one dyrect fro the Kyng to
yow, comandyng yow to be the messenger and brynger of the other lettres
to my Lord, my Lady, and ther consayll, for your owne mater; and thys me
thynkyth shall do well, for then shall the man shewe to my Lordes
consayll the lettre dyrect to yow that ye have awtoryte to be your owne
solycytour, and also it shall be thought that the Kyng tendryth yow and
your mater, when he wryghtyth to your sylf for it.

My Lady wayteth hyr tyme with in viij. dayes at the ferthest.

    [Footnote 169-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] The date of this letter
    is shown by the reference to the situation of the Duchess of
    Norfolk. Compare Letter 817. There is an old, and nearly
    contemporary, endorsement, ‘Anno xv^o, mens. Novemb.,’ but this is
    clearly erroneous.]


822

ABSTRACT[170-1]

[Sidenote: 1472 / DEC. 7]

1472, 7 Dec.--‘Vigill of Concepcion of oure Lady,’ 12 Edw. IV. Indenture
of agreement (in English) between Bp. Waynflete and William Worceter, by
which the latter undertakes to deliver to the Bishop all deeds,
charters, rolls of courts, and accounts, and all other muniments which
are in his hands relating to the manors and lands of the late Sir John
Fastolf, excepting lands, etc. in Norfolk, called Fairchilds, and two
tenements and two gardens called Walles, in Suthwerk, of which he
himself is seised; and also, as executor of the will of Sir Thomas
Howes, to deliver up all money and goods of Fastolf, and obligations for
property, etc., sold by the said Thomas, which he can recover, over the
sum of £40 due to him, the said William Worceter, for his marriage, and
also to assist the said Bishop and his College at Oxford in all matters
relating to Fastolf’s lands; in return for which the Bishop covenants to
pay him £100, and also an allowance upon all sums of money recovered by
him.

    [Footnote 170-1: This abstract is taken from Mr. Macray’s account
    of the MSS. in Magdalen College, Oxford, printed in the Fourth
    Report of the Historical MSS. Commission.]


823

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[171-1]

_To my Mastyr, Sir John Paston, Knyght, be thys delyveryd._

[Sidenote: 1472 / DEC. 18]

Ryght worchepfull Syr, I recomand me to yow, thankyng yow most hertly of
your gret cost, whyche ye dyd on me at my last being with yow at London;
whyche to my power I wyll recompence yow with the best servyse that
lythe in me to do for your plesure, whyll my wytts be my owne.

Syr, as for the mater of Caster, it hathe be mevyd to my Ladys good
grace by the Byshope of Wynchester, as well as he kowd imagyn to sey it,
consederyng the lytyll leyser that he had with hyr; and he told me that
he had ryght an agreabyll answer of hyr, but what hys answer was, he
wold not tell me. Then I axyd hym what answer I should send yow, in as
myche as ye mad me a solysyter to hys Lordship for that mater; then he
bad me that undyr consayll I shold send you woord that hyr answer was
more to your plesure than to the contrary, whych ye shall have more
pleyn knowlage of thys next terme, att whyche tyme bothe my Lord and she
shall be at London.

The Byshop cam to Framlyngham on Wednysday at nyght, and on Thursday by
x. of the clok befor noon, my yong Lady was krystend, and namyd Anne.
The Byshop crystend it and was godfader bothe, and with in ij. owyrs and
lesse aftyr the crystenyng was do, my Lord of Wynchester departyd
towards Waltham.[171-2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . And I let
you pleynly weet, I am not the man I was, ffor I was never so roughe in
my mastyrs conseyt as I am now, and that he told me hymselff before
Rychard Sothewell, Tymperley, Sir W. Brandon, and twenty more, so that
they that lowryd, nowgh[172-1] laughe upon me; no moor, but god look.

Wretyn at Framlyngham, the Fryday next aftyr that I depertyd fro yow.
Thys day my Lord is towardys Walsyngham, and comandyd me to overtake hym
to morow at the ferthest.

  J. P.

    [Footnote 171-1: [From Fenn, ii. 42.] Fenn informs us that this
    letter is dated on the back in a contemporaneous handwriting,
    ‘Anno x^o.,’ which seems to mean 10 Edw. IV. This date however, is
    certainly erroneous; for in the inquisitions taken on the death of
    the Duke of Norfolk, Anne, Lady Mowbray, his daughter and heir,
    was found to have been four years old on the 10th December 1476.
    She was born, therefore, on the 10th December 1472.]

    [Footnote 171-2: Then follows the substance of a conversation
    between the Lady of Norfolk and Thomas Davers, wherein she
    promises to be a friend to Sir John Paston concerning Caister; but
    J. Davers swore J. Paston not to mention her goodwill to any
    person, except to Sir John.--F.]

    [Footnote 172-1: In the modern version Fenn reads, ‘so that they
    that _loved not_, laugh upon me.’]


824

JOHN PASTON TO THE DUKE OF NORFOLK[172-2]

_To the right hyghe and myghty Prince, and my right good and gracious
Lord, my Lord the Dwke of Norffolk._

[Sidenote: 1472]

Mekly besechyth your hyghness, your poore and trew contynuall servaunt
and oratour, John Paston, the yonger, that it myght please your good
grace to call on to your most discret and notabyll remembrance that
lateward, at the cost and charge of my brodyr, John Paston, Knyght,
whyche most entendith to do that myght please your hyghness, the ryght
nobyll Lord, the Bysshop of Wynchester entretyd so, and compouned with
your Lordshepp, that it liekyd the same to be so good and gracious Lord
to my seyd brodyr, that by forsse of serteyn dedys, relessis, and
lettrys of attorney selyd with the sealys of your good grace, and of
other serteyn personys infeoffyd to your use in the maner of Caster,
late John Fastolffes, Knyght, in the conte of Norffolk, my seyd brodyr
and I, with other enfeoffyd to my seyd brodyrs use in the seyd maner,
wer peasably possessyd of and in the same tyll syche tyme as serteyn
personys, servaunts on to your good grace, entred in to the seyd maner,
and therof have takyn the issuses and profitys in the name of your seyd
hyghnesse by the space of thre yer and more, to the gret hurt of my seyd
brodyr and me your seyd servuantes and oratour: wherfor, as I have oft
tymys befor thys, I beseche your good grace, at the reverence of God,
and in the wey of charyte, that my seyd brodyr may by your hyghness be
ayen restoryd in to the possessyon of the sey[d] maner, acordyng to the
lawe and good conscyence; and wee shall prey to God for the preservacyon
of your most nobyll estate.

    [Footnote 172-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This petition is shown
    by internal evidence to have been drawn up towards the end of the
    year 1472, as it sets forth that the Duke had been more than three
    years in possession of Caister, which was surrendered to him in
    September 1469. There can be no doubt therefore that it was
    presented or prepared for presentation at the time of John
    Paston’s visit to Framlingham.]


825

MARGARET PASTON TO SIR JAMES GLOYS(?)[173-1]

[Sidenote: 1473 / JAN. 18]

I recomaund me to you, and thanke you hertyly of your letteris, and
delygente labour that ye have had in thoes materis that ye have wretyn
to me of, and in all other, to my profette and worschep, and in
esspeciall atte this sesons towchyng the mater that I sent you the
indenture of. Ye have lyghtyd myne hert therin by a pound, for I was in
fere that it wold not have bene doo so hastyly with oute danger. And as
for the letters that Thom Holler son schuld have brought me, I see
nother hym ne the letters that he schuld have brought; wherefor, I pray
you hertely, yeve it be no dysese to you, that ye will take the labour
to bryng Walter theyr he schuld be, and to purvaye for hym that he may
be sette in good and sad rewle. For I were loth to lese hym, for I trust
to have more joye of hym than I have of them that bene owlder; though it
be more coste to me to send you forth with hym, I hold me plesed, for I
wote wele ye schall best purvaye for hym, and for suche thynges as is
necessar to hym, than another shuld doo, after myne intent. And as for
ane hors to lede hys gere, me thynke it were best porvaye one atte
Camberage, lesse than [_unless_] ye canne gytte onye carreours from
thens to Oxynforth more hastyly; and I mervell that the letters come not
to me, and whether I may laye the defaute to the fauder or to the son
therof. And I wold Water schuld be copilet with a better than Holler son
is, there as he schalbe; howe be it I wold not that he schuld make never
the lesse of hym, by cause he is his contre man and neghbour. And also I
pray you wryte a letter in my name to Watere, after that ye have knowne
myne entent by fore this to hym ward; so that he doo welle, lerne well,
and be of good rewle and disposycion, ther shall nothyng faylle hym that
I may helpe with, so that it be nessessare to hym; and bydde hym that he
be not to hasty of takyng of orderes that schuld bynd hym, till that he
be of xxiiij. yeere of agee or more, thoff he be consaled the contrare,
for oftyn rape [_haste_] rewith. I will love hym better to be a good
secular man than to be a lewit prest.

And I am sore that my cosyn Bernay is seke, and I pray you yeff me white
wine, or ony of my wateris, or ony other thyng that I have that is in
your awarde, may doo hym ony comforth. I lette hym have it; for I wold
be right sory yf ony thyng schuld come to hym botte good. And for
Godsake advise hym to doo make hys will, yeve it be not doo, and to doo
well to my cosyn, his wiff, and els it were pete; and I pray you to
recomaunde me to hyr, and to my nawnte, and to all the gentill men and
gentil women there. And as for John Daye, and he be dede I wold be sory,
for I know not howe to come by my mony that he oweith me; and I porpose
that Pacoke schall have les to doo for me another yeres than he haith
had, if I may be better porvayed with your helpe, for he is for hym
self, bott not for me.

And as for ony marchandes to my corn, I can gytte none here; therfor I
pray you, doo ye als wele therein as ye canne; also I send you by the
bereer hereof the bill of myne resaytes. And yef ye go forth with
Walter, I pray you come to me als sone as ye may after ye be commyn
home; and me lyketh myne abydyng and the contre here[175-1] right well,
and I trust whan sommer comith and fayre wether, I schall lyke it
better, for I am cherysed here botte to wel.

And I constrew your letter in other materis well i nough, whereof I
thanke you; and if it nede not to send forth Walter hastyly, I wald ye
myght come to me, thowe ye schuld com opon one day and goo agayne on the
next day, than schuld I comon with you in all materis; and I hold best
if ye have not the letteris that Holler son schuld have brough me, that
ye send Sym over for them this nyght that I may have them to morowe, and
yif ye may combe your self, I wold be the better playsed.

And I remember that water of mynte or water of millefole were good for
my cosyn Bernay to drynke, for to make hym to browke,[175-2] and yeve
thei send to Dame Elesebeth Callethorppe ther ye shall not fayill of the
tone or of both, sche haith other wateris to make folkis to browke. God
kepe you.

Wrytyn on the Monday next after Sent Hiller.

I have no longer leyser atte this tyme.

    [Footnote 173-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] The allusion by the
    writer to her cousin Berney’s sickness makes it probable that this
    letter was written in 1473, when the Monday after St. Hilary would
    be the 18th of January. John Berney of Reedham died on the 20th
    January in that year (Inquis. _post mortem_, 13 Edw. IV., No. 17).
    The letter has neither signature nor address, but was probably
    written by Margaret Paston to her priest, Sir James Gloys, who
    died in the course of this year.]

    [Footnote 175-1: I think this must have been written at Maltby,
    where Margaret Paston certainly lived during her later years, and
    where she was doubtless staying when she desired a license of the
    Bishop to have the Sacrament in her private chapel. _See_ No.
    821.]

    [Footnote 175-2: _i.e._ to enable him to retain food in his
    stomach.]


826

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[175-3]

_To John Paston, Esquyer, or to Mestresse Margret Paston, hys Modre be
thys letter delyveryd._

[Sidenote: 1473 / FEB. 3]

Weell belovyd Brother.[175-4] . . . . . . . . .

As ffor tydyngs heer, ther bee but fewe, saff that the Duke of
Borgoyen[175-5] and my Lady, hys wyffe farethe well. I was with them on
thorysdaye last past at Gawnt.[176-1] Peter Metteney ffarethe weell, and
Mestresse Gretkyn bothe and Rabekyn recomend hyr to yow; she hathe ben
verry seke, but it hathe doon hyr goode, ffor she is ffayrer and
slenderer than she was, and she cowde make me no cheer but alwey my
sawse was ‘How ffaret Master John, yowr brother?’ wher with I was
wrothe, and spake a jalous worde or too, dysdeynyng that she sholde care
so moche ffor yow, when that I was present.

Sende me worde to Hoxons in wrygtyng, what goode the Bysshop ded ffor me
at Framynham, and howe my Lorde, my Ladye, and all the cort or [_are_]
dysposyd to me wards.

I here also seye that my Ladye and yowrs, Dame Margret Veer[176-2] is
ded, God have hyr sowle; iff I weer not sorye ffor herr, I trowe ye have
been.

No moor to yow at thys tyme, but All myghty Good have yow in kepyng.

Wretyn at Caleys the iij. daye of Februarye Anno R. R. E. iiij. xij^o.

  J. P., K.

    [Footnote 175-3: [From Fenn, ii. 120.]]

    [Footnote 175-4: Here follows an account of letters sent to him
    from Calais--of farme barly in Fledge, and of olde stuffe at
    Norwich, etc.--F.]

    [Footnote 175-5: Charles the Bold, and Margaret, sister to Edward
    IV.]

    [Footnote 176-1: Ghent, in the Netherlands.]

    [Footnote 176-2: Daughter and heir of Sir William Stafford, and
    wife to Sir George Vere. Their son, John Vere, was afterwards Earl
    of Oxford.--F.]


827

NOTE

[Sidenote: 1473 / FEB. 10]

In Blomefield’s History of Norfolk, vol. xi. p. 208, it is stated that
‘on February 10 in the 13th of Edward IV., an indenture was made between
Sir William Yelverton, William Jenney, serjeant-at-law, and William
Worcester, executors of Sir John [Fastolf] on one part, and Thomas Cager
and Robert Kyrton on the other, whereby the said Robert was appointed
surveyor of the lands and tenements in Southwark and other places in
Surrey, late Sir John’s, to perform his last will; and also receiver of
rents; who was to have 6 marks _per ann._, and to be allowed besides all
reasonable costs that he shall do in the defence and keeping out John
Paston, Esq., and of all others claiming by him.’


828

ABSTRACT[177-1]

‘J. P.’ [JOHN PASTON] TO SIR JOHN PASTON

[Sidenote: 1473 / MARCH 8]

As I promised in the letter that Playter sent, Playter and I have been
with my mother to get her to make chevesance for the £100, but she bade
us send you word, you need look for no other comfort from her. Jwde can
tell you Barker’s answer. As for John Kook you promised him payment
yourself and to Sir John Styll 5 marks in part payment. My mother has
sold her barley for 14_d._ I never meet John Smyth but I speak of it to
him. He keeps his courts here at Norwich all the week. As for Fastolf,
I can only speak to Wymondham his father-in-law, which I do as often as
I see him. Would be sorry the great matter which requires hasty answer
‘lest the kok be in perayle’ should be delayed by his negligence. Thinks
Edmund Fastolf ‘was a reasonable man to Robert of Lyne. Wherefore, let
my brother Edmund sue for the same, for one wife may serve for us both
till better peace be. So God help me ye may allege a plain excuse that
these dyrk wars have so hindered me that her lyvelode and mine both
should be too little to live at our ease till I were further before the
hand than I could be this two year, and she found after her honor and my
poor appetite.’ Would rather forbear what he would have than bring them
in pain. ‘Say better for me, for ye can and ye will. This matter must be
honestly handled, for I wot well my young lady of Oxenforthe shall hear
of it. We have here no tidings, but a few Frenchmen be whyrlyng on the
coasts, so that there dare no fishers go out but under safe conducts.
I pray you, and ye have any more oranges than ye occupy, that poor men
may have part for a great bellied lady.’ First Monday of Clean Lent,
13 Edw. IV.

  _Addressed_--‘A Mys^r John Paston, schevaller, soyt done.’
  _Endorsed_--‘Mens’ Marcii Anno xiij^{o}.’

    [Footnote 177-1: [From MS. Phillipps 9735, No. 257.]]


829

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[177-2]

_To my Master, Sir John Paston, Knyght, be thys delyverd in hast._

[Sidenote: 1473 / MARCH 26]

As I was wryghtyng this bylle, Mastresse Jane Harsset comandyd me
streyghtly that I shold recomand hyr to yow in hyr best wyse, and she
sendyth yow word she wold be as fayne to here fro yow as an other poore
body.

Syr, it is so that my cosyn John Blenerhasset[178-1] is enformyd that
for verry serteyn he is chosyn to be on of the colectours of the taske
in Norffolk, wher in verry trowthe he hathe not a foot of lond with in
the shyer; wherfor I beseche yow that, as hastyly as ye may aftyr the
syght of thys bylle, that it may please yow to take the labore to comon
with Sir Rychard Harrecorte, and to let hym have knowlage that thys
gentyllman hathe nowght with in the shyer, and that ye tweyne may fynd
the meane to get hym owght of that thanklesse offyce, for I promyse yow
it encomberthe hym evyll, and my mastresse hys wyffe, and alle us hys
frendys here; and if so be that ye and Sir R. Harcorte may not fynd the
meane betwyx yow, that then it may please yow to meve my Lord
Chamberleyn with thys mater, and so Master Harsset prayithe yow, and
Mastresse Jane, hys wyff also, for she lyekyth no thyng by the ofyce.

It is thowght her amonge us that Heydons be the causers that he was set
in. I prey yow enqwer of Sir R. Harcort who was the cause, and that it
may be wyst in the next byll that ye send me; for if they wer the
causers, it lythe in my cosyn Harsettes power to qwytte theym.

We have no tydynges to send, but that our Frenshemen[178-2] whyche kepte
our costs her ar home into France, for lake of vytayll, we saye.

Hogan[178-3] is put in the Gyld Halle in Norwyche, and shalbe browght up
to London for reportyng of hys old talys. He varythe not. No more, but I
prey God send yow the Holy Gost amonge yow in the Parlement Howse, and
rather the Devyll, we sey, then ye shold grante eny more taskys.

Wretyn the day next aftyr our Lady Day, the Anuncyacyon, Anno xiij. E.
iiij^{ti}.

   *   *   *

Yong Heydon laborythe alle that he can to mary on of hys doughtyr to
yonge John Barney[179-1] by the mean of W. Calthorpp.

  J. P.

    [Footnote 177-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter is endorsed
    with what appears to have been the date of its receipt--‘xxviij^o
    die Marcii A^o xiij^o E. iiij^{ti}.’]

    [Footnote 178-1: John Blennerhasset, Bleverhasset, and (for
    shortness) often called Harsset, of Frens, married first Jane,
    daughter of Thomas Higham, Esq., and secondly Jane, daughter of
    Sir Thomas Tindal of Hockwold, Knight. He died in 1510, aged
    87.--F.]

    [Footnote 178-2: The French vessels that infested the coast, as
    mentioned in the preceding letter.]

    [Footnote 178-3: Hogan pretended to foretell commotions and
    rebellions, etc.--F.]

    [Footnote 179-1: This marriage never took effect.--F.]


830

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[179-2]

_A son trescher & bon ame Freer, John de Paston, Esquier._

[Sidenote: 1473 / APRIL 2]

Weell belovyd brother, I recomand me to yow, letyng yow wete that at the
request of Mestresse Jane Hassett and yow, I have laboryd the knyghtys
off the sheer off Norffolk, and the knyghtys off the shyre of Suffolk.
I understond ther had ben made labor that suche a thing shulde have ben
as ye wrotte to me off, but now it is saff.

Raff Blaundrehasset wer a name to styrte an hare. I warrant ther shall
come no suche name in owr bokys, ner in owr house; it myght per case
styrt xx^ti harys at onys; ware that j_d._ perse.[179-3] I redde ther in
the bille off Norffolk, off one John Tendall, Esquier, but I suppose it
be not ment by owr Tendall, and iff it be, he shall not rest theer, iffe
I maye helpe it.

As for tydyngs, the werst that I herde was that my moodre wyll not doo
so moche ffor me as she put me in comffort off.

Other tydyngs, I herd sey ffor serteyn that the Lady Fitzwater is ded,
and that Master Fytzwater shall have CCCC. mrke a yer more than he had.
I am not sory therffor.

As ffor the worlde I woot nott what it menyth, men seye heer, as weell
as Hogan, that we shall have adoo in hast; I know no lyklyhod but that
suche a rumor ther is.

Men sey the Qwyen with the Prynce shall come owt off Walys, and kepe
thys Esterne with the Kyng at Leycetr, and some seye nowther off them
shall com ther.

Item, off beyond the see, it is seyd that the Frense Kyngs host hathe
kyllyd the Erle of Armenak[180-1] and all hys myry mene; some seye undre
appoyntment, and some seye they wer besegyd, and gotyn by pleyn assault.

Ferthermoor men seye that the Frenshe Kynge is with hys ost uppon the
water off Some a lx. myle froo Caleys; I leve them wheer I ffond them.

I made yowr answer to the ffrends off Mestresse Jane Godnoston accordyng
to yowr instrucions. As for me, I am nott serteyn whether I shall to
Caleys, to Leysetr, or come home into Norffolk, but I shall hastely send
yow worde, &c.

Wretyn the ij. daye of Aprill, Anno E. iiij. xiij^{o}.

    [Footnote 179-2: [From Fenn, ii. 122.]]

    [Footnote 179-3: ‘Ware that penny purse’--_qu._ that penurious
    fellow?]

    [Footnote 180-1: John, Count of Armagnac, assassinated on the 6th
    March 1473.]


831

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[180-2]

_To John Paston, Esquier._

[Sidenote: 1473 / APRIL 12]

Best belovyd brother, I recomend me on to yow, letyng yow weet that I
receyvyd on Wednysday last past yow angery lettre towchyng the troble
that Sandre Kok is in, wherein I have largely comonyd with John Russe,
and advysed hym to take a curteys weye with Sandre, for yowre sake and
myn. He seythe he wold not dysplease yow by hys wyll, and that he
purposythe to entrete yow and wolde deserve it to yowe. He undrestod
that ye had large langage to the jurye that passyd again Saundre. I lete
hym weete that ye weer wrothe, and that he shall nowther please yowe ner
me, but iff he dele curteyslye with Saundre. I tolde hym as for the
condempnacion uppon the accion off trespasse I thoght it nowther good
ner worshypfull. Also I have wretyn to the person of Maultby to dele
curteyslye with Saundre, iff he woll please yow or me.

Item, I sende yow herwythe the _supercedyas_ for Saundre; so that iff ye
fynde any meane for the condempnacions that than ye maye ease therwith
the suerte off pease. John Russe, as I suppose, is att home thys daye.

Item, as for tydynges heer, the Kynge rydeth fresselye thys daye to
Northamton warde, there to be thys Esterne, and after Esterne he
purposythe to be moche at Leysettre, and in Leysettre shyre. Every man
seythe that we shall have a doo or Maye passe. Hogan the prophet is in
the Tower; he wolde fayne speke with the Kyng, but the Kynge seythe he
shall not avaunt that evyr he spake with hym.

Item, as for me, I most nedys to Caleyse warde to morowe. I shall be
heer ageyn, if I maye, thys next terme. John Myryell, Thyrston, and W.
Woode be goon from me, I shrewe them.

My modre dothe me moor harme than good; I wende she wolde have doon for
me. Playter wroot to me that she wolde have leyde owt for me C_li._, and
receyvyd it ageyn in v. yer of the maner of Sporle, wherto I trustyd,
whyche if she had performyd, I had nott ben in no juperte of the maner
of Sporle. Neverthelesse I shall do whatt I kan yitt. I preye yow calle
uppon hyr for the same, remembre hyr of that promyse.

Item, I preye yow remembre hyr for my fadrys tombe at Bromholme. She
dothe ryght nott [_naught_]; I am afferde of hyr that she shall nott doo
weell. Bedyngfelde shall mary Sir John Skottes doghtre, as I suppose.

Item, Janore Lovedaye shall be weddyd to one Denyse, a ffuattyd (?)
gentylman, with Sir G. Brown, nowther to weell ner to ylle.

Item, as for me, iff I had hadd vj. dayes leyser more than I hadd, and
other also, I wolde have hopyd to have ben delyveryd of Mestresse Anne
Hault. Hyr frendes, the Quyen and Attclif agreyd to comon and conclude
with me, if I can fynde the meanes to dyscharge hyr concyence, whyche I
trust to God to doo.

i. Item, I praye yow that ye take a leyser thys Estern halydayes to ryde
to Sporle and sende for John Osberne, and I wolde ye sholde conclude a
bergayn with one Bocher, a woode byer, whyche Mendham that was my fermor
ther can fecche hym to yow.

ii. And thys is myn entent. I wolde have the dykes to stonde stylle,
acordyng as John Osberne and I comonyd, I trow xij. foothe with in the
dyke.

iij. Item, that the standardes off suche mesur as he and I comonyd off
maye also be reservyd. I suppose it was xxx. inche, abowt a yerde from
the grownde.

iiij. Item, that it be surely fencyd at the cost off the woode byer in
any wyse with a sure hedge, bothe hyghe and stronge.

v. Item, that ther be a weye taken with the fermores for the undrewood,
so that I lesse not the ferme therffore yerly. Item, John Osbern can
telle yow the meanys howe to entrete the fermores, for Herry Halman hath
pleyed the false shrowe and fellyd my woode uppon a tenement off myn to
the valew off xx. marke, as it is tolde me. I praye yow enquire that
matre and sende me worde and dele with hym ther afftre.

vj. Item, iff the seyde wood clere above alle charges excep as is above,
be made any better than CC. marke, I wolle seye that ye be a good
huswyff. John Osberne seythe that he woll do me a frendes turne ther in
and yitt gete hym self an hakeneye.

vij. Memorandum, that he have nott past iij. or iiij. yere off untraunce
at the ferthest.

viij. Item, thatt I have payement off the holl as shortly as ye kan,
halffe in hande, the remenaunt at halffe yeer, or ellys at ij. tymes
with in one yere at the ferthest by mydsomer xij. monyth.

ix. And that ye make no ferther bergayn than Sporle woode and the
lawnde, not delyng with noon other woode, nowther in the maner, nor
ellys wher in none other tenement.

x. Item, that ye have sufficient sewerte for the monye, with penaltes
iff nede be, some other men bonden with hym for the payement.

xj. Item, I wolle well be bownde to waraunt it to hym.

Item, I sende yow herwith a warant to yow and John Osberne joyntlye to
bergayn. Comone and conclude that bergayn.

xij. Item, I suppose he woll, iff he conclude with yow, desyre to felle
thys Maye, and I to have mony soon afftre. I reke not thowe he fellyd
not tyll thys wynter; but iff he woll nedes begyn thys Maye, therffor I
wryght yow thus hastely entrete hym, iff ye can, that he felle not tyll
wynter.

xiij. Item, be ware how ye bergeyn, so that he felle nott butt in
sesonable tyme and sesonable wood, for he maye felle no undrewood thys
Maye, as I trowe.

Item, as for yowr costes late th  .  .  .  .  .  .  . newe fynde yow
mete, and I woll allow it there, or ellys make me a bylle what it
dra[weth to]  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . yow.

Item, I praye yow iff ye g  .  .  .  .  . for me as ye can. I made my
Lady heer but easy cheer, neverthelesse I gaff hyr .  .  .  .  .  ys.

I promysed hyr to purveye hyr  .  .  .  .  weselys, but I was deseyvyd;
yit I wend to have had one.

My Lord of Norffolk hathe ben mevyd for Caster by my Lord Cardenall and
the Bysshop of Wynchester, but it woll take non effecte  .  .  .  my
Lady come. God gyff grace that she brynge auctoryte when she comythe
thys next terme to common ther in and conclude, and so I prey yow advyse
hyr. Itt may haply paye for hyr costes.

No mor to yow, but wretyn at London, the xij. daye of Apryll, Anno E.
iiij^ti xiij^{o}.

   *   *   *

I sende yow her with ij. letteris from John Osbern to me, wherby and by
hys billes ye may undrestond the verry valewe off the wood.

I praye yow sende me wryghtyng ageyn by the Mondaye vij. nyght afftre
Ester; iff Hoxon or the goode man off the Goot have it, they shall
conveye it welle.

    [Footnote 180-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]

  [[... Maye, as I trowe.
  _final period (full stop) missing_]]


832

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[184-1]

_To John Paston, Esqer, in Norffolk._

[Sidenote: 1473 / APRIL 16]

Wyrsshypfull and ryght hertyly belowyd brother, I recomande me on to
yow, letyng yow wete that on Wednysdaye last past I wrote yow a letter,
wheroff John Carbalde had the beryng, promyttyng me that ye shold have
it at Norwyche thys daye, or ellys to morowe in the mornyng, wherin I
praye yowe to take a labor accordyng afftr the tenur off the same, and
that I maye have an answer at London to Hoxon, iff any massenger come,
as ene I maye doo ffor yow.

As ffor tydyngs, ther was a truse taken at Brussellys about the xxvj.
daye off Marche last past, be twyn the Duke off Borgoyn and the Frense
Kyngs imbassators and Master William At Clyff ffor the Kyng heer, whyche
is a pese be londe and water tyll the ffyrst daye off Apryll nowe next
comyng, betweyn Fraunce and Ingelond, and also the Dukys londes. God
holde it ffor ever and grace be.

Item, the Erle of Oxenfford was on Saterdaye at Depe, and is purposyd
into Skotlond with a xij. schyppys. I mystrust that werke.

Item, ther be in London many fflyeng talys, seying that ther shold be a
werke, and yit they wot not howe.

Item, my Lorde Chamberleyn[184-2] sendyth now at thys tyme to Caleys the
yonge Lorde Sowche[184-3] and Sir Thomas Hongreffords dowtre and
heyr,[184-4] and some seye the yonge Lady Haryngton, thes be iij. grett
jowelles, Caleys is a mery town, they shall dwell ther I wott not
whylghe [_how long_].

No mor, but I have ben, and ame troblyd with myn over large and curteys
delyng with my servants, and now with ther onkynd nesse; Plattyng,
yowr men wolde thys daye byd me ffar well to to morow at Dover,
notwithstandyng Thryston yowr other man is ffrom me, and John Myryell,
and W. Woode whyche promysed yow and Dawbeney, God have hys sowle, at
Castre, that iff ye wolde take hym in to be ageyn with me, that then he
wold never goo ffro me, and ther uppon I have kepyd hym thys iij. yer to
pleye Seynt Jorge and Robyn Hod and the Shryff off Notyngham, and now
when I wolde have good horse he is goon into Bernysdale, and I withowt a
keeper.

Wretyn at Canterburye, to Caleys warde on Tewesday and happe be, uppon
Good Frydaye the xvj. daye off Apryll, Anno E. iiij^ti xiij^{o}.

  Yowr,

  J. P., K.

Item, the most parte off the sowdyors that went over with Sir Robert
Green have leeff, and be comyn hom, the hyghe weye ffull; my cariage was
behynd me ij. hours longer than I lokyd afftr, but I wysse I wende that
I myght have etyn my parte on Good Frydaye all my garees [_finery_] and
pryde had ben goon, but all was saffe. I pray yow iff W. Mylsent go
ffroo yow, that he myght come to me at Caleys, I will have hym.

    [Footnote 184-1: [From Fenn, ii. 130.]]

    [Footnote 184-2: William, Lord Hastings.--F.]

    [Footnote 184-3: John, Lord Zouch of Harringworth; he was
    attainted in the first year of Henry VII.--F.]

    [Footnote 184-4: Mary, daughter and heir of Sir Thomas Hungerford;
    she afterwards married Edward, son and heir to William, Lord
    Hastings, who in her right became Lord Hungerford, her uncle’s
    attainder being reversed.--F.]


833

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[186-1]

_To John Paston, Esquyer, in Norwich._

[Sidenote: 1473 / MAY 18]

Ryght wershypfull brother, I recomand me to yow, &c.[186-2] . . . . . .
. . . .

As for tydyngs, the Erle of Wylshyr[186-3] and the Lord Sudele[186-4] be
ded, and it was seyd that Sir W. Stanle was deed, but nowe it is seyd
naye, &c.

Item, as ffor your goyng to Seyn James,[186-5] I beleve it but atwyen
ij., &c.

I herd seye that a man was thys daye examyned, and he confessed that he
knewe greet tresor was sende to the Erle off Oxenfford, wheroff a m^le
li. [£1000] sholde be conveyd by a Monke off Westminster, and some seye
by a Monke off Chartrehows.

Item, that the same man schulde acuse C. gentylmen in Norffolk and
Suffolk that have agreyd to assyst the seyd Erle at hys comynge thyder,
whyche as itt is seyd, sholde be within viij. dayes afftr Seynt Donston,
iff wynde and weddyr serffe hym--fflyeng tales. No mor at thys tyme, but
God have yow in kepyng.

Wretyn at London on Seynt Donstones daye, xviij. daye of Maye, Anno E.
iiij^ti xiij^{o}.

  JOHN PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 186-1: [From Fenn, ii. 136.]]

    [Footnote 186-2: Then follow some orders concerning servants,
    debts, securities, etc.--F.]

    [Footnote 186-3: John Stafford was created Earl of Wiltshire in
    1470. He was uncle to Henry, Duke of Buckingham.]

    [Footnote 186-4: . . . . . Butler, Lord Sudley.--F.]

    [Footnote 186-5: Apparently John Paston had talked of making a
    pilgrimage to the shrine of St. James of Compostella in Spain.]

  [[xviij. daye of Maye, Anno E. iiij^ti
  _be owt off syght_]]


834

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[187-1]

_To John Paston, Esqer, be thys delyveryd._

[Sidenote: 1473 / JUNE 3]

Ryght wyrshypfull brother, I comand me to yow, letyng yow weet that thys
daye I was in very purpose to Caleys ward, all redy to have goon to the
barge, saff I teryed ffor a yonge man that I thoght to have had with me
thyddr, on that was with Rows, whyche is in the cowntre; and because I
cowde not geet hym, and that I have no mor heer with me butt Pampyng,
Edward, and Jak, therffor Pampyng remembryd me, that at Caleys he tolde
me that he purposed to be with the Duchesse off Norffolk, my Lady and
yowrs. And Edward is syke and semythe nott abydyng; he wolde see what
shold falle off thys worlde; and so I am as he that seythe ‘Come hyddr
John, my man.’ And as happe was yisterday, Juddy went affor to
Caleysward; wherffor I am nowe ille purveyd, whyche ffor owte that I
knowe yit is lyke to kepe me heer thys Wytsontyd.[187-2] Wherffor iff ye
knowe any lykly men, and ffayr condycioned, and good archers, sende them
to me, thowe it be iiij. and I wyll have them, and they shall have iiij.
mrks by yer, and my levere [_livery_].

He maye com to me hyddr to the Gott [_Goat_], or yit to Caleys with a
riall[187-3] iff he be wyse, whyche iff nede bee, I wolde that Berker
toke hym to come uppe with, iff it be suche one as ye tryst.

Item, I suppose bothe Pytte and Kothye Plattyng shall goo ffrom me in
hast; I wyll never cherysshe knaves soo as I have don, ffor ther sakys.

Item, I praye yow sende me a newe vestment off whyght damaske ffor a
dekyne, whyche is among myn other geer at Norwiche, ffor he shall ther
too as ye woot off: I wyll make an armyng doblett off it, thow I sholde
an other tyme gyff a longe gown of velvett ffor another vestment, and
send it in all hast to Hoxon to send me.

I hopyd to have been verry mery at Caleys thys Whytsontyde, and am weell
apparayled and apoyntyd, saff that thes ffolks ffayle me soo, and I have
mater ther to make off ryght excellent. Som man wolde have hastyd hym to
Caleys thowe he had hadd no better erand, and som men thynke it wysdom
and profyght to be theer now weell owt off the weye.

Item, as ffor the Bysshop[188-1] and I, we bee nerrer to a poynt than we
weer, so that my part is nowe all the londes in Flegge Holly, the maner
off Heylesdon, Tolthorpe, and tenements in Norwyche and Erlham, excepte
Fayrechylds, but ffarweell Drayton; the Devyll do ytt them.

Item, large and fferr comynycacion hathe ben bytwyen Sir John Fogge,
Ric. Haulte, ffor ther suster and me, byffor Doctor Wyntborne and ellys
wher, so that I am in better hope than I was, by Seynt Lawrens[188-2]
that I shall have a delyveraunce.

Item, as ffor tydyngs heer, I trow ye have herde yowr parte, howe that
the Erle off Oxenfford landyd by Seynt Osyes in Essexe, the xxviij. daye
off Maye, saff he teryed nott longe, ffor iff he had, the Erle of
Essexe[188-3] rod to hym wardys, and the Lords Denham and Durasse, and
other mor, whyche by lyklyod sholde have dystrussyd hym; but yit hys
comyng savyd Hogan hys hed, and hys profesye is the mor belevyd ffor he
seyde that thys troble sholde begyn in Maye, and that the Kynge sholde
northwards, and that the Scotts sholde make us werke and hym batayle.

Men loke afftr they wot not what, but men by harneys ffast; the Kyngs
menyall men and the Duke off Claraunces, ar many in thys town; the Lord
Ryverse[188-4] com to daye, men seye to purveye in lyke wyse.

Item, how that the Cowntesse off Warwyk[188-5] is now owt off Beweley
Seyntwarye, and Sir James Tyrell conveyth hyr northwarde, men seye by
the Kynges assent, wherto som men seye that the Duke off Clarance is not
agreyd.

Item, men seye that the Erle off Oxenfford is abowt the Ilde off Tenett
hoveryng, som seye wyth grett companye, and som seye, with ffewe.

No mor, but God kepe yow.

Wretyn at London the iij. daye off June, Anno E. iiij^ti xiij^{o}.

  JOHN PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 187-1: [From Fenn, ii. 138.]]

    [Footnote 187-2: Whitsunday fell on the 6th June in 1473.]

    [Footnote 187-3: A royal, a gold coin of 10_s._ value.]

    [Footnote 188-1: Waynflete, Bishop of Winchester.]

    [Footnote 188-2: 10th of August.]

    [Footnote 188-3: Henry Bourchier, Earl of Essex, Lord Treasurer.]

    [Footnote 188-4: Anthony Woodville, Earl Rivers, beheaded at
    Pontefract, 1483.]

    [Footnote 188-5: Anne, widow of Richard Neville, the great Earl of
    Warwick, sister and heir to Henry Beauchamp, Duke of Warwick, and
    mother of Isabel, the wife of George, Duke of Clarence.]


835

ABSTRACT[189-1]

[Sidenote: 1473 / JUNE 13]

Norf. and Suff. Deeds, No. 67. ‘Relaxatio Willielmi Paston facta Will.
Wainflet et aliis de toto jure suo in manerio vocat’ Caldecots,
Akethorp, Spitlings, Habland, Broweston, etc. Jun. 13, Edw. IV. 13.’

    [Footnote 189-1: [From MS. Index in Magd. Coll., Oxford.]]


836

SIR JOHN PASTON TO EDMUND PASTON[189-2]

_A Edmond Paston, Esquyer, a Caleys soyt donne._

[Sidenote: 1473 / JULY 5]

Brother Edmond, I grete yow weell, letyng yow weete that abowt thys daye
vij. nyght I sende yow a letter by Nycholas Bardeslee a sowdyer, whyche
is wont woute[189-3] to be at border [_brother_] Perauntys,[189-4] and
also an hoseclothe[189-5] off blak ffor yow. I wende that ye sholde have
hadde itt within ij. dayes, but I am afferde that he deseyved me.

Item, I lete yow weet that Plattyng is comen hyddr, and he seythe that
ye gaffe hym leve to ffetche hys geer and Pittys, and that is hys erande
hyddr and noon other, ner he thowt never to goo ffro me, ner he wyll
nott goo ffro me as he seythe, wherffor, I praye yow sende me worde off
hys condycions, and whyghe ye thynke that he sholde never do me
worshypp.

He seythe also that he and Pytte weer at the takyng off the Esterlyngs,
and that he was in the _Pakker_, and Pytte in the _Crystoffre_. I praye
yow sende me worde howe bothe he and Pytte quytte them, by the report
off some indyfferent trewe man that was ther, iff they quytte them
weell, I wolde love them the better, wherffor the next daye afftr the
syte of thys letter, I praye yow wryght ageyn, and sende it by the next
passage.

Item, I sende a lytell praty boxe herwith, whyche I wolde that Juddy
sholde delyver to the woman that he wetyth off, and praye hyr to take it
to the man that she wetyth off; that is to seye, as moche as ye knowe
all well i now, but ye maye nott make yow wyse in no wyse.

Item, I praye yow sende me worde as ye wer wont to do off heer wellffar,
and whether I weer owt and other inne or nott; and whether she shall
fforsake Caleys as sone as ye sende me worde off or nott.

By God I wolde be with yow as ffayne as yowr selff, and shall be in hast
with Godds grace.

Item, as ffor my brother John, I hope within thys monyth to see hym in
Caleys, ffor by lyklyhod to morowe or ellys the next daye he takyth
shyppe at Yarmothe, and goothe to Seynt James[190-1] warde, and he hathe
wretyn to me that he wyll come homwarde by Caleys.

Item, I suppose that James Songer shall come with me to Caleys, the
rather ffor yowr sake.

Item, Mestresse Elysabett ffareth well, but as yit Songer knoweth nott
so perffytly all that ye wolde weet, that he woll nott wryght to yow off
thees ij. dayes tyll he knowe moor, but iff she hadde ben bolde, and
durst have abydyn styll at hyr gate, and spoken with me, so God helpe
me, she had hadd thys same that I sende nowe wher ye woot off, whyche ye
shall see woryn heer afftr, itt is a praty ryban with praty
agletts[190-2] and goodlye.

Make yow not wyse to Juddy, nowther not that ye wolde weet any thynge,
ffor I maye sey to yowe at hys comyng ovr, he browt goodly geer
reasonablye.

Item, as ffor my byll[191-1] that is gylt, I wolde it weer taken head
too; ther is one in the town, that can glaser weell i nowe, as I herde
seye. Also, ther is on comythe every markett daye ffro Seynt Omerys to
Caleys and he bryngethe dagers, and ffetchyth also, he may have it with
hym, and brynge it ageyn the next markett daye ffor xij_d._ or xvj_d._
at the most, and ellys late it be weel oylyd and kepte tyll I come. No
more.

Wretyn at London the v. daye of Julle, Anno E. iiij^ti xiij^{o}.

    [Footnote 189-2: [From Fenn, ii. 146.]]

    [Footnote 189-3: So in Fenn.]

    [Footnote 189-4: Fenn suggests a fanciful explanation of the
    expression ‘border Perauntys,’ presuming the latter word not to be
    a proper name; but see page 163.]

      [[_page 163 = near end of Letter 815_]]

    [Footnote 189-5: Cloth for hosen.]

    [Footnote 190-1: _See_ page 186, Note 5.]

    [Footnote 190-2: Pendant ornaments of metal, like tags or points,
    etc.--F.]

    [Footnote 191-1: A warlike instrument of offence.--F.]

  [[Footnote 190-1
  Note 5.
  _text has “Note. 5.”_]]


837

SIR JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[191-2]

_To my ryght wyrshypful moodre, Margret Paston._

[Sidenote: 1473 / JULY 30]

Ryght wyrshypfull and my ryght tendre modre, I recommaunde me to yow,
besechyng yow of yowr dayly blessyng. Please it yow to weet that I herde
not from yow off longe tyme, whyche cawsythe me to be ryght hevye; ner
at the last tyme that I sende to yow in wryghtyng I hadde from yowr
selffe noo wryghtyng ner answer ageyne, saff by Playter one tyme and by
my brother one other tyme; whyche answer off Playter was noo thyng
acordyng but contraryaunt to other wryghtyng more comfortable that he
hadde sent me nott longe byffore that on yowr behalve, as he wrott,
whyche God amende. Neverthelesse to my more hevynesse, I herde seye that
ye sholde have been passhyng hevy for my sake, and in cheffe for that I
was lyke to late goo the maner off Sporle, wherin I was pytte in comfort
to have had relyffe by the meanes off yow; and syns it was tolde me that
iff I leete it goo that ye wold therfore dysavauntage me more lond in
tyme to come, off syche as by poscybylyte myght come to mee of yowris.
Uppon whyche corage my grauntdame[192-1] and myn oncle[192-2] togedre
gaffe me an answer on hyr part moche lyke, and so my fadre, God have hys
sowle, leffte me scant xl_li._ londe in reste, and ye leffe me as
pleasythe yow, and my grauntdame at hyr plesur; thus may I have lyttel
hope off the worlde. Neverthelesse I beseche yow to be my good moodre,
how so ever ye do with yowr londe; for I feell weell that iff I have one
losse I am lyffe [_q._ like?] therfor to have three. But as for Sporle,
it shall nott goo iff I maye, ner by my wyll; and iff ther hadde been
performed me as largelye as was promysed me by Playter, I were sewre it
sholde nott have goon, nor yit sholde nat goo. Neverthelesse iff ye and
all my frendys and yowris in Norffolk myght have lende me so moche monye
and to have takyn it uppe in v. yere, I suppose they sholde peraventure
have ben payed ageyn in a yer or ij. iff I had solde any woode.
Neverthelesse, plese yow to weet that I have provyd my fadres wyll and
testement, wherin I maye nowt dele on to the tyme that all the
executoris have reffused; wherffor ther most be sende sitatacions
(_sic_) to yow and alle other that weer namyd my fadris executoris.
Wherin iff ye list not to take admynystracion, as I woot well ye woll
nott off olde, ye most than make a proctor that must, on yowr behalve,
byffor my Lorde of Canterbury, with a sufficiaunt warant and autoryte,
undre a notarys syngne ther in the corte, reffuse to take
admynestracion. And this instrument and aultoryte I beseche yow maye be
redy and att London by the fyrst daye of the terme; and iff yow be not
aqueynted with none suche at London, iff it please yowe to take and
avowe for your proctor and sende hym auctoryte, on [_one_] Master John
Halsnothe whyche was a clerke off Master Robert Centis[192-3] and was so
trusty to my fadre, God have hys sowle, and to sende me a letter off
yowre wylle ther in, I undertake that he shall not do but as ye sende me
worde. Plese it yow to gyff credence to Juddy herin. No more to you att
thys tyme, but Jhesu have yow in Hys kepyng. Wretyn att Caleys, the last
daye saff one off Julle.--Yowr sone,

  J. P., K.

    [Footnote 191-2: [Add. 34,889, f. 125.] This letter appears to be
    of the year 1473, as in that year Sir John Paston writes on the
    5th July that he hopes to be in Calais within a month (No. 836).
    Later in the year (22 Nov.) he writes that the citations here
    referred to were not ready (No. 842, p. 199). The date is further
    confirmed by what is said of the manor of Sporle (comp. pp. 181,
    182).]

      [[_Sporle, 181-82: item i. in Letter 831_]]

    [Footnote 192-1: Agnes Paston.]

    [Footnote 192-2: William Paston.]

    [Footnote 192-3: Robert Kent, who had been John Paston the
    father’s proctor in the Court of Archers. _See_ vol. iv. pp. 243,
    244.]


838

MARTIN RONDELLE TO SIR JOHN PASTON[193-1]

_Monseigneur Jehan Paston, chevalier d’ Engleterre._

[Sidenote: 1473 / AUG. 28]

Mon treschier et honnore seigneur, je me recomande a vous outant que je
puis ne scay. Et vous plaise savoir que je ay oy novelles de vous par
ung de vo marchans de Calais touchant unne armura de unna sella que je
vous doy, et de una barbuta, laquelle est en diferansce entre vous et
moy, de laquelle je vous ay aultre foix dist que je estoie contant de
fere toute rexon [_raison_], et en quore le vous dige prexentement que
je suis prest de fer tout chou qu’il apartient en tout rexon, set
[_c’est_] asavoir de la barbute et de l’armura de sella. D’aultre chiox
ne vous suis en riens tenut, forque en toute les chiox que me seroint
posible de faire pour l’amour de vous a vostre honneur et a vostre
profit, je suis tout jour prest a vostre comendement.

Item, en houltre, je ay entendut que vous voulles avoir unng harnax
complet. Com je prins vostra mexure dernierement quant vous fustes en
ceste ville de Bruges, saichies que je ay en quor vostre mexure de
toutes lez piesces; pour quoy, se il vous plaist que je la vous fasa, je
la vous faray de bon ceur, et tout cella que il vous plaira avoir fait;
et au regard du pris, je faray tellement que vous seres content de moy
pour tant quant il vous plaira lesiem savoir queles piesses que vous
voles avoir, et la faisson et le jour que vous la voles avoir par
quelcun aqui je puis in chauder en nom de vous, et qui me ballia argant
de sus, je feray si bien que se Dieu plaist vous vous loeres de moy.
Aultre chiox ne vous say que mander pour le prexent, senon que je prie a
Dieu que il vous doint ce que vostre ceur desir.

Escript a Bruges, le xxviij. jour de Ahoust, l’an lxxiij.

  Le tout vostre serviteur,
  MARTIN RONDELLE,
  Armurier de Monsire le
  Bastart de Bourgogne.

  _Endorsed_--Par Martyne Rowndell, armorer de Bruggys. Anno E. iiij^ti
  xiij^{o}.

    [Footnote 193-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]


839

LORD HASTINGS TO SIR JOHN OF MIDDLETON AND SIR JOHN PASTON[194-1]

_To my right hertily beloved frends and felaws, Sir John of Middelton,
and Sir John Paston, Knights._

[Sidenote: 1473 / SEPT. 16]

After herty recommendacion, I thank you of the gode attendance that ye
yeve unto the Kings counsail at Calais; and the gode and effectuelle
devoires that ye putte you in to assiste my depute Sir John Scot, in
alle suche things as mowe concerne the saufgarde of my charge there.
Leting you wite, that if ther be any thing that I can and may do for
you, I shal with right gode wil performe it to my power.

And I preye you to recommaunde me to my Lady Howard,[194-2] my Lady
Bourgchier,[194-3] and all othre ladies and gentilwomen of the saide
towne. And in likewise to the Mayre, Lieutenant, and felaship of the
staple; my felaws the souldeours, and all othre suche as ye shal seme
gode. And oure Lord sende you your desirs.

Writen at Notyngham, the xvj. day of Septembre.

Sir Joh Paston, I pray you to yeve credens to suche thing as my depute
shall shew you fro me, and conforme you to the same.

  Your felaw,

  HASTYNGS.

    [Footnote 194-1: [From Fenn, ii. 152.] This letter, Fenn tells
    us, is endorsed in a hand of the time, ‘E. (?) Hastyngs, Anno
    xiij^{o.},’ showing that it was written in the thirteenth year of
    Edward IV.]

    [Footnote 194-2: Margaret, wife of Sir John Howard, Lord Howard,
    and afterwards Duke of Norfolk. She was daughter of Sir John
    Chedworth, Knight, and died in 1490, 5 Hen. VII.]

    [Footnote 194-3: Lady Bourchier was probably the wife of a son of
    Sir John Bourchier, Lord Berners.]


840

NOTE

[Sidenote: 1473 / NOV. 1]

On the Close Roll 13 Edw. IV. m. 5, is an indenture tripartite bearing
date 1 Nov., 13 Edw. IV., between Thomas Byllyng, Chief-Justice, and
others, including William Paston on the one part; Jane Ingaldesthorp,
late wife of Edmund Ingaldesthorp, Knight, William Norys, Knt., and
Isabel, Marquesse Montague, his wife, of the second part; and William
Parker, citizen and tailor, London, of the third part.


841

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[195-1]

_To John Paston, Esquier, at Norwych, be thys delyvered._

[Sidenote: 1473 / NOV. 6]

Wyrshypfull and well belovyd brother, I comand me to yow, letyng yow
weet that the worlde semyth qweysye heer; ffor the most part that be
abowt the Kyng have sende hyddr ffor ther harneys, and it [is] seyd ffor
serteyn, that the Duke off Clarance makyth hym bygge in that he kan,
schewyng as he wolde but dele with the Duke of Glowcester; but the Kyng
ententyth, in eschyewying all inconvenyents, to be as bygge as they
bothe, and to be a styffeler atweyn them; and som men thynke that undre
thys ther sholde be som other thynge entendyd, and som treason
conspyred; so what shall falle, can I nott seye.

Item, it is seyde that yisterdaye ij. passagers off Dovr wer takyn;
I ffer that iff Juddy had noon hasty passage, so that iff he passyd nott
on Sondaye or Mondaye, that he is taken, and som geer off myn, that I
wolde not for xx_li._

I hope and purpose to goo to Caleys warde on Sondaye or Mondaye or nyghe
bye, ffor I am nott accompanyed to do any servyse heer; wherffor it wer
better ffor me to be owt off syght.[196-1]

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Item, Sprynge, that wayten on my ffadre when he was in Jowel hous [_gaol
house_], whom my ffadre at hys dyeng besett xl_s._ he cryethe evyr on me
ffor it, and in weye off almess, and he wolde be easyd, thow it wer but
xx_s._ or x_s._; wherffor he hathe wretyn to my modr, and most have an
answer ageyn; I wolde that my moodr sende hym, as thoghe she lende hym
som whatt, and he woll be pleasyd, and ellys he can seye as shrewdely as
any man in Ingelonde.

Item, the Kynge hathe sent ffor hys Great Seall; some seye we shall have
a newe Chauncelor, but som thynke that the Kynge dothe as he dyde at the
last ffeldys, he wyll have the Seall with hym; but thys daye Doctor
Morton, Master off the Rollys, rydethe to the Kynge, and berythe the
Sease [_Seals_] with hym.

Item, I had never mor nede off mony than now; wherffor Fastolffes v.
mrks and the mony off Master John Smythe wolde make me holl, &c.

Wretyn on Seynt Lenards Daye, Anno R. R. E. iiij^ti xiij^{o}.

Item, sende me my vestment acordyng to the letter I sent yow by Symond
Dam, in all hast.

  J. P., K.

    [Footnote 195-1: [From Fenn, ii. 126.] This letter is misdated in
    Fenn as of the 15th April. St. Leonard’s Day is the 6th November.]

    [Footnote 196-1: Here follow some money transactions relative to a
    Doctor Pykenham, his mother, and others.]


842

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[196-2]

_To John Paston, Esquyer, be thys delyvered._

[Sidenote: 1473 / NOV. 22]

Ryght wyrshypfull and hertyly belovyd brother, I comand me to yow,
letyng you wet that I receyvyd a letter that come from yow, wretyn circa
viij. Mychaelys,[196-3] wherin ye leet me weet off the decesse off Syr
James, and that my moodre is in purpose to be at Norwyche, and I am
ryght glad that sche wyll now doo somwhat by yowr advyce; wherffor be
war fro hense forthe that noo suche felawe crepe in be twyen hyr and
yow, and iff ye lyst to take a lytell labore, ye may lyff ryght well,
and she pleasyd. It is as good that ye ryde with a cople off horse at
hyr cost as Syr James or Richard Calle.

Ye sende me worde also that she in noo wyse wyll purveye thyr C_li._ for
the redemyng off Sporle. Late it goo. As towchyng that mater, John
Osbern tolde me that he comonyd with yow at Sporle of that mater; ferr
he devysed that Kokett, or suche an other man, sholde, to have it the
better cheppe, leye owt the valewe off vj. yere for to have it vij.
yere, wherto I wolde agre; and for Goddys sake, if thatt maye be browt
abowt, late it be doon. As ye woot of, it is laten for xxij_li._ be
yere, yit the fermor graunt but xxj.; but to Kokett it wolde be worthe
xxv_li._, yea and better. Neverthelesse, if Kokett wyll delyver
vj^xx._li._, I wolde he had it for vij. yeer, with thys that my moodre
be agreable to the same, by cawse of th’entresse that she hathe for my
brother William, whyche shall nott be off age thys vij. yeer;
neverthelesse, as ye know myn olde entent, I purpose to purvey for hym
in an other plase better than theer; whyche graunte off my moodre I
praye yow to be my solycytor in, whyche [and] it be browt abowt, Sporle
shall be in as goode case as evyr he was.

John Osbern willyd me to make yow a sufficiaunt waraunt to selle and
felle wood at Sporle, whyche I remembre ye have in as ample forme as can
be; neverthelesse iff thys meane above wretyn off letyng to ferme maye
be hadde, it shall, I hope, nat nede to felle ner selle moche. But I
remytte that geer to yowr dyscrescion, but iff ye have suche comforte,
I praye yow sende me worde. I maye seye to yow, John Osbern flateryd me,
for he wolde have borowyd mony off me.

Item, in retaylyng of woode theer, it weer harde to tryst hym; he is
nedye. If Kokett, or whoo so evyr had that maner to ferme for vij. yere,
and payd therffor but vj^xx._li._, he sholde, to lete it ageyn, wynne
xxxvj_li._, whyche we[re] moche; wherffor, iff it myght bee, yt wer more
resenable vj^xx. vij_li._ to be reseyvyd, and yit is ther lost
xxix_li._, or ellys iff ye take lesse mony and fewer yerys, so it be
aftre the rate, so ther be purveyd C_li._ at the lest; send worde.

Item, ye wroot that lyke a trewe man ye sende me xviij_s._ by Richarde
Radle. Ye weer to trewe; but he semys to be a false shrewe, for he browt
me noon yitt. Whethyr he be owt of town or nott, kan I nott seye.

Ye prayed me also to sende yow tydynges how I spedde in my materis, and
in cheff of Mestresse Anne Hault. I have answer ageyn fro Roome that
there is the welle of grace and salve sufficiaunt for suche a soore, and
that I may be dyspencyd with; neverthelesse my proctore there axith a
m^l. docatys, as he demythe. But Master Lacy, another Rome renner heer,
whyche knowyth my seyde proctor theer, as he seythe, as weell as Bernard
knewe hys sheeld, seythe that he menyth but an C. docates or CC. at the
most; wherffor afftre thys comythe moor. He wrote to me also, _quod Papa
hoc facit hodiernis diebus multociens_.

Item, as towchyng Caster, I tryst to God that ye shall be in it to myn
use or Crystmesse be past.

Item, yowr ost Brygham recomand hym to yow, and when he and I rekenyd,
I gave hym ij. noblis for yowr borde, whyll ye weer theer in hys
absence; but in feythe he wolde, for nowth that I kowde doo, take j_d._
Wherffor ye most thanke hym or charge me to thanke hym on yowr behalve
in some nexte epystyll that ye wryght to me to Caleys. He leete me weet
that he wolde do moor for yow than soo.

Item, my Lady Bowgcher was almost deed, but she ys amendyd. I trowe they
come in to Norffolk.

Item, as for W. Berker, I heer no worde from hym. I praye yow comon with
Berney ther in, he knoweth myn conceyt; and also I praye yow hast Berney
ageyn. I wold not that he played the fooll, ner wastyd hys tyme ner hys
sylver.

Item, as for the brace of growndes [_greyhounds_], or one verry goode,
or in especiall the blak of Germynes, I can nott seye but ye be a trewe
man, but William Mylsent isse a false shrewe, so mote I thee, and I trow
hys master ys too.

Item, I most have myn instrumentes hydder, whyche are in the chyst in my
chambre at Norwyche, whyche I praye yow and Berney to gedre joyntly, but
natt severally, to trusse in a pedde,[199-1] and sende them me hyddre in
hast, and a byll ther in how many peces. Thys most be had to avoyde
idelnesse at Caleys.

Item, I preye yow take heed among thatt my stuffe take noon harme, ner
that myn evydence, wher ye wott of, be owt of joperte.

Item, I praye yow doo for Berneye as ye kan, so that he maye be in
sewerte for hys annywyte, and that it be nott costious fro hense forthe
to hym any mor to come, or sende for it. I pray yow wynne yowr sporys in
hys mater.

Item, I purposed to have sent heer with the testament off my fadre and
the scytacions to my moodre to yow and Arblaster; but they be nott redy.
Within ij. dayes aftre the comyng of thys, I suppose they shall be with
yow, and than I shall wryght mor to yow.

As for other tydynges, I trust to God thatt the ij. Dukes of Clarans and
Glowcester shall be sette att one by the adward off the Kyng.

Item, I hope by the means of the Duke of Glowcester that my Lord
Archebyshop[199-2] shall come home.

Item, as towchyng my sustre Anne,[199-3] I undrestand she hathe bene
passyng seek; but I wende that she had ben weddyd. As for Yelverton, he
seyde but late that he wold have hyr, iff she had hyr mony, and ellis
nott; wherffor me thynkyth that they be nott verry sewre. But, amonge
alle other thynges, I praye yow be ware that the olde love of Pampyng
renewe natt. He is nowe fro me; I wott nat what he woll doo.

No more. Wretyn at London, the xxij. daye of Novembre Anno R. R. E.
iiij^ti xiij^{o}.

  JOHN PASTON, Kt.

    [Footnote 196-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]

    [Footnote 196-3: i.e. _circa octabas Michaelis_--about the Octaves
    of Michaelmas, or 6th October.]

    [Footnote 199-1: A kind of basket.]

    [Footnote 199-2: George Neville, Archbishop of York, though
    formerly pardoned, had been accused of holding correspondence with
    the Earl of Oxford, for which he was imprisoned at Guines.]

    [Footnote 199-3: Anne Paston married William Yelverton, grandson
    of Sir William Yelverton, the Judge.]


843

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[200-1]

_To John Paston, Esquier._

[Sidenote: 1473 / NOV. 25]

Ryght wyrshypfull and well belovyd brother, I recomaund me to yow,
letyng yow weet that I sende yow her with j. sitacion, where in ben my
moodre and yee, wheroff I praye yow that I maye have hasty answeer. The
effecte theroff is no moor, but ye bothe most sende answer, and make yow
a proctor heer, and that most come hyddre ondre a notaryes syngne,
affermyng that ye make suche a man, Master John Halsnothe, or ellis, yf
ye will do the cost, to sende some other hyddre; yowr proctor to take
admynystracion or to reffuse, and what so he dothe, ye to holde it for
ferme and stable. Than most my moodre and ye wryght a lettre, undre my
moodre seall and yowr syngne manuell, to me and Master John Halsnothe in
thys forme:--‘We gret yow well, letyng yow weet that we have made yow,
Master John Halsnothe, our proctor in the testament of John Paston,
husband and fadre to yow, wherin we wyll that on owr behalff ye refuse
the admynestracion of the seyde testament. And thys wryghtyng is to yow
warantt and dyscharge, and also the verry wyll of usse.’ Thys most we
have for owr dyscharge.

Item, I pray yow take good hedde to my soster Anne, lesse the old love
atwyen hyr and Pampyng renewe.

Item, I pray yow sende me worde howe my moodre is dysposyd to hyr
wardes, and iffe so weer that a good mariage myght be had, what she
wolde depart with.

Item, I praye yow that ye remembre hyr for the tombe off my fadr at
Bromholme, and also the chapell at Mauteby, and sende me worde how she
is dysposyd her in.

Item, iff I have Caster ageyn, whethyr she wolle dwelle ther or nott,
and I wyll fynde hyr a prest towardes at my charge, and geve hyr the
dovehowse and other comodytes ther; and if any horsekeper on myn lye
ther, I wolle paye for hys borde also, as weell as for the prestes.

Item, iff my modre sholde have a new prest, I thynk that my brother Syr
J. Goos weer a metly man to be ther. He wolde also doo, as ye wolde have
hym nowe, ber the cuppe evyn, as What-calle-ye-hym seyde to Aslake.

Be war of Myneres fro hense forthe, and sende me worde how ye trist
Doctor Pykenham. I wolde, if he wolde doo owght for my moodre, that he
hastyd the soner to paye me the C_li._, so that I myght pledge owt
Sporle.

Item, as for other tydynges, the Erle of Oxenforthe is stille besegyd.
Neverthelesse, onys he issued owt, and toke a jentylman, and hant
[_dragged_] hym within; but now off late he was besye, and one espyed
hym, and shott at hym and strake in the verry fase with an arowe. I sye
thys daye the same man, and theere I leef hym.

Iff Arblaster come to yow, ye maye see hys letter sente to hym by me,
wherin I have wretyn that he scholde take yowr advyce; but I praye you,
above all thynges, that me make hast so that I heer from yow ageyn by
thys day vij. nyght.

At London, the xxv. daye of Novembre.

  JOHN PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 200-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] The year in which this
    letter was written is clearly shown, partly by the allusions made
    in it to several matters mentioned in previous letters, and more
    especially by what is said of the Earl of Oxford. That nobleman
    was besieged in St. Michael’s Mount, Cornwall, by Sir Henry
    Bodrugan during October and November 1473.]

  [[... and hant [_dragged_] hym within
  _final italic “d” misprinted as “a”_]]


844

THE TENANTS OF SPORLE TO SIR JOHN PASTON[201-1]

_To oure specyall good lord and mayster, Syr John Paston, Knyght, be
this delivered in hast._

[Sidenote: Date uncertain]

Right worchepfull and oure specyall good mayster and loord, after our
dewe recomendacion with owre servyce. Please it yow to knowe that we arn
grevously troubled, and not lyke to kepe oure tenourys, the whiche we
holde of you, but yf ye helpe us; for we wer bete at the boordourys
syde, and afterwarde our servauntes wer bete at the plowe in Spoorle
felde, and somme of them be lyke to dey. And we redyn to Maister Shereve
and to Mayster Southwell for remedye, and thei advysed us to ryde to
Mayster Wyngfeld; and thenne we understode that Mayster Wyngfeld was
reden to London, &c. And so we stonden withoute remedye, and in grete
doute of our lyves, and losse of our goodys. Wherfor we beseche you to
socoure us accordyng to your right and owres. And ellys we kan nott
abyde it, &c. Cryst kepe your good lordshep.

  Be your poore tenauntes
  of Spoorle.

    [Footnote 201-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] The date of this letter
    is very uncertain, but as a good deal is said about this time of
    the manor and wood of Sporle, we insert it here for convenience.]


845

NOTE

[Sidenote: 1474 / FEB. 9]

It appears by the Early Chancery Proceedings printed by the Record
Commission (vol. i. p. xc.), that a decree was given in Chancery in
Hilary term, 13 Edw. IV. compelling William Paston and other trustees to
fulfil a covenant between Richard, Duke of Gloucester and Elizabeth,
Countess of Oxford. On the Close Roll, 13 Edw. IV. memb. 1, is a release
by William, Bishop of Ely, Sir Thomas Montgomery, John Wentworth, clk.,
William Paston, Esq., Roger Townesend and Jas. Arblaster to Richard,
Duke of Gloucester, of all their right in Ocle Magna and Parva, etc., in
Essex, which they have by enfeoffment of Eliz., Countess of Oxford, and
in other manors in Norfolk and Suffolk which they lately had of the gift
of the same. This release is dated 9th Feb. 13 Edw. IV., and was
acknowledged in Chancery on the 11th Feb. Below it are enrolled three
other deeds by the Countess and her feoffees to the Duke, dated 9th
June, 12 Edw. IV., and acknowledged in Chancery, 25th June, 14 Edw. IV.


846

SIR JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[203-1]

_Mestresse Margrett Paston, at Norwyche._

[Sidenote: 1474 / FEB. 20]

Ryght honorable and most tendr good moodr, I recomand me to yowe,
besechyng yow to have, as my tryst is that I have, yowr dayly blessyng;
and thanke yow off yowr good moderhood, kyndenesse, cheer, charge, and
costes, whyche I had, and putte yow to, att my last beyng with yow,
whyche God gyffe me grace her afftr to deserve!

Please it yow to weet, that I thynge longe that I heer nott ffrom yow or
ffrom Pekok yowr servaunt, ffor the knowlege howe he hathe doon in the
sale off my fferme barlye, ner whatt is made theroff; wherffor I beseche
yowe, if it be not answeryd by that tyme that thys bylle cormythe to
yowe, to hast hym and itt hyddre wards; ffor iff that had nott taryed
me, I deme I had been at Caleys by thys daye; ffor it is soo, as men
seye, that the Frense Kynge with a gret hoste is at Amyans, but iij^xx.
myle from Caleys; and iff he, or hys, roode byffor Caleys, and I nott
theer, I wolde be sorye.

Item, men seye that the Erle of Oxenfford hathe ben constreynyd to sewe
ffor hys pardon only off hys lyffe; and hys body, goodes, londes, with
all the remenaunt, at the Kynges wyll, and soo sholde in all haste nowe
come in to the Kyng; and some men seye that he is goon owt off the
Mounte,[203-2] men wot not to what plase, and yit lefte a greet garnyson
theer, weell ffornysshyd in vytayll, and all other thynge.

Item, as ffor the havyng ageyn off Castre, I trust to have good tydyngs
theroff hastelye.

Item, my brother John ffarethe weell, and hathe doon ryght delygentlye
in my cosyn Elizabet Berneys mater, wheroff hastely I trust he shall
sende hyr tydyngs that schall please hyr; and as to morow he purposyth
to take hys jurneye to Walys warde to the Lorde Ryverse. No mor at thys
tyme, but Jeswe have yow in Hys kepyng.

Wretyn at London the xx. daye off Feverer, Anno E. iiij^ti xiij^{o}.

  Yowr sone,

  J. PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 203-1: [From Fenn, ii. 154.]]

    [Footnote 203-2: St. Michael’s Mount in Cornwall.]


847

LORD HASTINGS TO JOHN PASTON[204-1]

_To my right trusty and welbeloved servaunt, John Paston, Squier._

[Sidenote: 1474(?) / APRIL 26]

John Paston, I recommaunde me unto you. And whereas I appointed and
desired you to goo over unto Guysnes to yeve youre attendaunce and
assistaunce upon my brother Sir Rauf Hastings in all suche things as
concerne the suretie and defense of the Castell of Guysnes during his
infirmyties; it is shewed unto me that ye have full truely and
diligently acquyted you unto my saide brother, in all his besynesses
sithe your comyng thider. Whereof I thanke you hertly. And as I conceive
to my grete comfort and gladnesse, my saide brother is wele recovered
and amended, thanked be God. And soo I truste he may nowe spare you.
Wherupon I have writen unto him, if he may soo doo, to licence you to
come over unto me ayen. Wherefore I woll and desire you, th’assent of my
saide brother had, to dispose you to come over in all goodly haste, as
well for suche grete maters, as I fele by youre ffrends, ye have to doo
here, as to yeve youre attendaunce upon me. And your retourne ye shall
be to my welcome.

From London, the xxvj. day of Avrill.

[204-2]I pray you in no wise to depart as yet without my brother Roaf
asent and agrement; and recommaund me to my syster, all my nieces, to
the constabyll, and to all Ryves [_reeves_].

  Your tru frend,

  HASTYNGES.

    [Footnote 204-1: [From Fenn, ii. 296.] I cannot discover in what
    year John Paston could have been staying at Guisnes during the
    month of April at the request of Lord Hastings, unless it was in
    the year 1474. There seems no other probable year in which we have
    not distinct evidence of his being elsewhere.]

    [Footnote 204-2: This postscript is in the writer’s own hand, the
    preceding part of the letter being in that of a clerk. A
    fac-simile of the postscript is given by Fenn.]


848

SIR RALPH HASTINGS TO JOHN PASTON[205-1]

_To my feithful lovyng gode cousyn, Johan Paston._

[Sidenote: 1474(?) / MAY 9]

Cousyn Paston, I recommaunde me to you in as speciall wise as I cane.
And like you to witte, on Sondaye at even last I hadde writing and
evedence frome my lorde by Punche of tidyngis and have understonde them
wel al a longe. And on Monday erly in the mornyng I came to Calais to
have spoken with you, but I came to late. Praying you to advertise my
lord[205-2] to se wel to him self, etc. And at my comyng home the same
nyght I felle doune syke, and have ever sith kept my bedde and yitte do.
And, as you knowe wel, the Connestable sykened with you in his goyng to
Calais, of whome I doubt me, and so I do of my self bothe. So that here
amongis us nowe is no man to stirre about and see quykly to alle thingis
as ther aught to be and is nede to be, which hevieth me gretly; and
though I were up and might somwhat stire myself, yitte I am not seure so
to contynue ij. daies to-geder, etc. As for moo men, my Lord hathe
praied me and advised me to holde me content with thoo that I have, and
that I shulde make as litel coste in reparacions as I maye, because he
cannot se wel howe the monney cane be goten to content them. Cousyn, as
for moo men ye knowe right wel thoo that we have are to fewe, and we
have nede; notwithstonding I shal do as wel as I may with thoo that I
have. But as [for][205-3] eny ferther reparacions, might I ones for oure
seurte have this fournisshed that I am about, I kepe not to make moo,
for I doubt me that this we are about, that parte therof wil reste in my
nekke, because we cane not be seure of oure assignement. I pray you,
cousyn, brekes to my Lord all suche maters that ye cane remembre and
thinke[205-4] may be for the wele of us and the seurte of this place, as
my ful speciall truste and alle othir mennes here is in you. I hadde
thought to have writton to my lord to have sente some othir seure man
hidre to have assisted and holpen us during oure infirmitees, but I fele
by Punche that my Lord saith I write always so plainly to him that hit
fereth him, and therfore I dar not but shal forbere to write any more
so; howe be hit, it were ful necessarye and behofful so to do, that
knoweth God, Who ever preserve you. Writton at Guysnes, the ix^e daye of
May.

I praye you to sende us some of your tidingis by this berer as oft as ye
may. And if ther be anything I may do to your plesir, I shal do it with
as good hart as ye cane desire.

  Your tru luffuyng coussen,

  RAUFF HASTYNGIS.

    [Footnote 205-1: [Add. MS. 34,889, f. 122.] This letter was
    clearly written in the same year as No. 847, which was apparently
    1474.]

    [Footnote 205-2: Lord Hastings.]

    [Footnote 205-3: Omitted in MS.]

    [Footnote 205-4: ‘thinke’ repeated in MS.]


849

ABSTRACT[206-1]

[Sidenote: 1474 / JULY 24]

Letters patent, dated at Westminster, 24 July, 14 Edw. IV., for levying
a subsidy in the county of Norfolk for a war against France.

    [Footnote 206-1: [Add. Charter 14,973, B.M.]]


850

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[206-2]

_To Sir John Paston, Knyght, or to hys brodyr Edmund in hys absence,
lodgyd at the George by Powlys Wharff, in London._

[Sidenote: 1474 / JULY 25]

Ryght worchepfull sir, I recomand me to yow, preying yow to remembyr, or
ye depert ought of London, to spek with Herry Ebertonys wyf, draper, and
to enforme hyr that I am profyrd a maryage in London, whyche is worth
vj^c. [600] mark and bettyr; with whom I preyid yow to comone, in as
myche as I myght not tery in London myself, alweys reservyng that if so
be that Mastresse Eberton wyll dele with me, that ye shold not conclud
in the other place, thow so wer that Eberton wold not geve so moche with
Mastress Elyzabet, hys dowghtyr, as I myght have with the other, for
syche fantazy as I have in the seyd Mastress Elyzabet Eberton. And that
it lyek yow to sey to Ebertons wyff that syche as I spak to hyr of
shalbe bettyrd rather then enpeyred as for my part; and if it lyek hyr
to deale with me, I wylbe at London for that cawse only with in xiiij.
dayis aftyr the wryghtyng of thys byll, with Godes grace, Who preserve
yow and yours.

Wretyn at Norwyche, on Seynt Jamys Day.

   *   *   *

Also, sir, I prey yow that ye wyll, as I desyerd yow, comon with John
Lee or hys wyf, or bothe, and to undyrstond how the mater at the Blak
Freerys dothe, and that ye wylle see and spek with the thyng your sylf,
and with hyr fadyr and modyr, or ye depert; and that it lyek yow to
desyer John Lee is wyff to send me a byll in all hast possybyll, how fer
forthe the mater is, and whedyr it shalbe necessary for me to come up to
London hastyly or not, or ellys to kast all at the Kok.

Also, sir, I prey yow that Pytt may trusse in a male, whyche I left in
your chambyr at London, my tawny gowne furyd with blak, and the doblet
of porpyll sateyn, and the doblet of blak sateyn, and my wryghtyng box
of syprese, and my book of the Metyng of the Dwke and of the Emperour,
and when all thys gere is trussyd in the male, to delyver it to the
berer herof, to brynge me to Norwyche.

Item, I send you herwith the pylyon for the male, and x_s._ for the
hyer, whyche is usery, I tak God to rekord.

Also, that it lyek yow to spek with your apotycary, whyche was som tyme
the Erle of Warwykes apotycary, and to weet of hym what the wedow of the
Blak Freiris is woorthe, and what hyr husbondes name was. He can tell
all, for he is executore to the wedous husbond. I prey yow forget me
not, no more then I do yow. I have spokyn thys day with Jamys Hubberd
and Herry Smyth, and to morow I shall have an answer of theym.

Also, my modyr wyll labore thys mater with effect, that the CC. mark may
be had for the wood.

Also, brodyr Edmund, I prey yow, and my brodyr Sir John be not in
London, that ye wyll labore all thys maters with effect, as my trust is
in yow in every poynt as is above wretyn.

Also, I assartayn yow that I was with Ferrour thys day, and he had no
leyser to comon with me; but I wyll be with hym ayen to morow by
apoyntment betwyx hym and me, and so as I speed I shall send yow woord
by the next man that comyth to London.

Also, I sent John Lee is wyff a lettyr by on Crawethorn dwellyng in Wood
street, or ellys in Sylver street at the end of Wood street. I prey yow
weet whedyr she had it or nought; and she had it not, brodyr Edmund,
I prey yow go to the same Crawethorn, and tak the lettyr of hym, and
delyver it hyr in all hast.

  J. PASTON.[208-1]

    [Footnote 206-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter is endorsed
    in a contemporaneous hand ‘Anno xiiij^o,’ showing that it was
    written in 1474, the 14th year of Edward IV. We also find Sir John
    writing to his brother in November following that his brother
    Edmund had heard nothing more of Eberton’s daughter.]

    [Footnote 208-1: This signature stands in the middle of the
    postscript.]

  [[... Who preserve / yow and yours.
  _final . missing or invisible_]]


851

ABSTRACT[208-2]

[Sidenote: 1474 / OCT. 24]

‘Bill’ dated 24 Oct., 14 Edw. IV., relative to the pledging of certain
parcels of plate by William Paston, Esq., to Elizabeth Clere of Ormesby.
The parcels amount in all to 250 oz. 4 dwt., and are pledged for £40.
_Sealed._

ii. Fair copy of the preceding.

    [Footnote 208-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]


852

ABSTRACT[208-3]

THE VICAR OF PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON

[Sidenote: 1474 / NOV. 3]

When my master Sir John’s baily was at Paston he scared your tenants,
bidding them pay no rents to Mr. William Paston. On which Harry Warns
wrote to Mr. William, who bade him warn them not to pay money to any one
else; otherwise he would meet them at London ‘as the law would,’ or at
some market or fair, and make them pay arrears to Midsummer. Beware of
Warns, for he made Master William privy to all the examinations of the
tenants by my master your son. He also charged the tenants not to sell
as my master desired, else Master William would undo them. ‘_Ideo_,
putte no trost in hym, _quia duobus dominis nemo potest servire_.’
Pastun, 3 Nov.

  [This and the letter following both appear to have been written at
  the time of Sir John Paston’s dispute with his uncle William, at the
  end of the year 1474.]

    [Footnote 208-3: _Ibid._]


853

ABSTRACT[209-1]

[THE VICAR OF PASTON] TO MRS. [MARGARET PASTON]

[Sidenote: 1474]

John Qwale, farmer of Paston, is distressed by things that Herry Warns
has done and said against him. Warns carried home ‘an esse’ [_ash_]
blown down by the wind, and says it is your will, because Master John
Paston has given him power over all that he has in Paston. ‘More awre he
stondes in grete dowte to ery or to sawe’ [_to harrow or to sow_], for
John of Bactun says he shall have no land, unless he find surety, ‘and
it were no resun that he suld somerlay and compace hys londes to a noder
mans hand.’ Warns says if Qwale put out any cattle at the gates, he will
take it for the grain that Master William delivered to him. He says Mrs.
Margaret Paston[209-2] has no rule there, and shall have none; also that
John Qwale shall not have Gyns close nor the Chyrche close, as he has
taken them to farm. ‘Qwere fore, bott ze gyfe hym oderwas power, he wyll
gefe up all.’

    [Footnote 209-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]

    [Footnote 209-2: Mrs. Margaret Paston is here spoken of by name
    and in the third person, but the letter can hardly be addressed to
    any one else.]


854

[WILLIAM PASTON] TO SIR JOHN PASTON[209-3]

_[To] my right worshipfull neview [Sir J]ohn Paston, Knyghte, be [this]
lettre delivered in hast._

[Sidenote: About 1474(?)]

[Right] worshipful neview, I recommaund me to you. And, sir, I pray you
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . that ther was none obstacle ner lettinge
that ye found in me to . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . save me harmeles;
at whiche tyme it was thought aswel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . Johns by obligacioun was not inow to save me harm[eles] . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . [i]n the meane seasoune; for as your reasoun
will give . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ght fell of yow but goode. And if
the caas so fill that . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ys will take it on
them, than I to bere the losse. Wherupp[on] . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . [b]ound to me to save me harmeles. And for as muche . . . . . .
. . . . . . . m by obligacioun of statute merchaunt for you the . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . in myne oune kepinge for my discharge, and after a
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . [r]estorid me ageyn at this Michelmas. And m
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . shuld hange still till
Candilmas, and me thinke it is by con . . . . . . . . obligacions
paiable at . . . . . [Candle]mas I did at the begynny[ng] . . . . . will
kepe still the . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . or
sufficient and that . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . as wold pay at
th. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . with me than thus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . indenture wherby . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . for be cause that ye w . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . experyens.

Also I wold avyse you . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . my
Lord of Norfolk.

Also, nevew, there is onne Fr . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
but hym silf and his wif and . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
wherfore I have writin to . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . in
this matier; and I trust l . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . And I
pray yow that may ha . . . . . . . . . . . .

    [Footnote 209-3: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] Of this letter only two
    fragments remain, giving, as will be seen, a very mutilated text.
    Little more can be said about the contents than that they refer to
    money matters between William Paston and his nephew Sir John,
    which are probably those referred to in succeeding letters. The
    handwriting is that of William Paston. A mutilated endorsement,
    apparently in the handwriting of John Paston the younger, shows
    merely the words ‘ . . . . . to Sir J. P. for . . . . .’]


855

ABSTRACT[210-1]

[Sidenote: Date uncertain]

Fragment of a draft deed by which Sir John Paston and John Paston, Esq.,
mortgage certain premises not named to the use of Master John Morton,
William Paston, Thomas Playter, and Thomas Lovell, for £114.

  [Nothing is clear about the date of this document, but we place it
  here, as bearing, like the last, on money matters between Sir John
  Paston and his uncle William.]

    [Footnote 210-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]


856

SIR JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[211-1]

_To Mestresse Margrett Paston at Norwyche, or to J. Paston in hyr
absence._

[Sidenote: 1474]

Ryght wyrshypfull and my moste kynde and tendre moodre, I recomaund me
to yow, thankyng yow off the grete cost and off the greet chere that ye
dyd to me and myn at my last beyng wyth yowe; whyche cheer also hath
made me perfyghtly hooll, I thanke God and yow, in so moche that where
as I feeryd me that for weykenesse, and so green recuveryd off my
syknesse, that I scholde have apeyryd by the weye; but, God thanke yow,
I toke so my crommys whyls I was wyth yow, that I felyd my sylfe by the
weye that God and ye had made me stronger than I wenyd that I had ben,
in so myche that I feell my selffe every daye holler than other.

It was soo that I mett wyth myn onkle William by the weye, and there in
the felde I payed hym the iiij_li._ whyche I had borowyd off hym; and he
was passyng inquisytyff howe that I was purveyd for recompensyng off
Towneshend. I tolde hym I hopyd weell; he tolde me that he undrestood
that I had the C_li._ of the Bysshopys executores, and he had herde seye
that I had also borowyd another C_li._ of a marchaunt, and so I lakyd
but an C. marke. I deme he herde thys of T. Lovell, for I tolde hym that
I was in hope to fynde suche a freende that wolde lende me C_li._ He
axed me, who was that? I answeryd hym, an olde marchaunt, a freende of
myn, but myn oncle thowte that shold be by weye of chevyshanse
[_usury_], and to myn horte; wherffor I was pleyne to hym, and tolde hym
that ye wer sewerte therffor, and purveyed it off suche as wolde doo for
yowe. And as for the forte [_fourth_] C. mark, he seyde to me that as
for that he wolde, rather than joperte sholde be, purvey it by weye off
chevyshaunce at London, in so moche that, er he come fro London, he had
for my sake leyde v. C. markes worthe of plate with Hewghe Fenne. The
place at Warwykes Inne is large, and my grawntdame is agyd; it had ben
jopertous to leve moche plate wyth hyr, thoghe halffe were hyr owne. But
if I maye do other wyse, I purpose nott to chevyshe any mony by hys
meane.

Item, I have delyveryd yowre botell to Courbye the caryer thys same
daye, and he promysed me to be with yow on Mondaye nyghte, or ellys on
Touesday tymely. He hathe also xl_d._ to paye for the thryd hyryd horse,
and he bryngythe the iij. horse wyth hym, and is contente for hys labor
and for the mete largely. They be delyveryd hym in as good, and rather
better plyght, than whan I had them forthe, and not gallyd nor hurte. He
hate also ij. sadelys, one of my brotheres, and one other hyred, as ye
woot off.

Item, he hathe a peyre botys off Edmond Reedes, the shomaker, whyche
Saundre borowyd off hym. I beseche yowe that William Mylsent or Symme
maye se that every man have hys owne.

Item, as for my brother Edmond, blyssyd be God, he is weell amendyd.

Item, as for Hankyn owr dogge, I am a fferde never to see hym, but if
[_unless_] yowr good helpe bee.

Item, as for the bookes that weer Sir James, iff it lyke yow that I maye
have them, I ame not able to by them; but somwhat wolde I gyffe, and the
remenaunt with a goode devowte herte, by my trowthe, I wyll prey for hys
sowle. Wherffor iff it lyke yow by the next messenger or karyer to sende
hem in a daye, I shall have them dressyd heer; and iff any off them be
claymyd here aftre, in feythe I wyll restoor it.

Wretyn on Saterdaye.

  JOHN PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 211-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] It is evident from the
    contents that this letter must have been written shortly before
    that which follows.]


857

SIR JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[213-1]

_To Mestresse Margrete Paston, or to Roose, dwellyng byffore hyr gate at
Norwyche._

[Sidenote: 1474 / NOV. 20]

Aftre dew recomendacion, my most tendre and kynde moodre, I beseche yow
off yowr dayly blessyng. Please it yow to weete that I reseyvyd a lettre
thhat come from yowe, wretyn the xxvj. daye of Octobre, none erst
but[213-2] on Wednysday last past, wherby I conceyvyd that, at the
wryghtyng off that letter, ye weer nott serteyn of the delyng betwyn
Towneshende and me. It was so that, God thanke yow, I receyvyd the
xx_li._ broght by Syme, and also the mony browght by my brother, with
whyche mony, and with moor that I had my selff, I redemyd the maner of
Sporle, and payed Towneshend bothe the CCCC. marke ther ffor, and also
x_li._ that I owte hym besyde, and have off hym aqwytaunce off all
bargaynes and off all other dettes. Neverthelesse, I assayed hym iff he
wolde, iff nede hadde ben, gyvyn me a xij. monyth lenger respyght,
whyche he grauntyd to do; but in conclusyon I can nott entrete hym, but
that he woll have the uttremest of hys bargayn, and thys xx_li._
payeable at Candelmesse and Esterne. I kan entrete hym noon other wyse
as yit; wherffor I thynke, iff I had passyd my daye, it had ben harde to
have trustyd to hys cortesye, in so moche I ffynde hym also ryght loose
in the tonge. For Bekham, he spekyth no thyng comfortably ther in; what
he wyll doo, can I nott seye.

Item, as for Castre, it nedyth nott to spore nor prykke me to doo owghte
ther in. I doo that I can with goode wyll, and somwhat I hope to doo
hastely ther in that shall doo goode.

Item, as for the bokes that weer Syr James, God have hys sowle, whyche
it lykethe yow that I shall have them, I beseche yow that I maye have
them hyder by the next massenger, and iff I be goon, yit that they be
delyveryd to myn ostesse at the George, at Powlys Wharffe, whyche wolle
kepe them saffe, and that it lyke yow to wryght to me whatt my peyne or
payment shall be for them.

Item, it lyked yow to weet of myn heelle. I thanke God nowe that I am
nott greetly syke ner soore, but in myn heele, wherin alle men know nott
whatt peyne I feele. And wher ye advysed me to hast me owt of thys
towne, I wolde full fayne be hense. I spende dayly mor than I sholde
doo, if I wer hense, and I am nott well purveyed.

Item, blessyd be Good, my grauntdam is amendyd by suche tyme as myn
oncle W. come hyddre. But my yongest cosyn Margret, hys doghtre, is ded
and beryed er he come home.

I am as moche afferde off thys londe that is in hys hande as I was off
that that was in Towneshendes hande. I hope to wryght yow moor serteynte
within iiij. or v. dayes. No more, &c.

Wretyn the xx. daye of Novembre, anno E. iiij. xiiij^{o}.

  Yowr Sone,

  J. PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 213-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]

    [Footnote 213-2: No earlier than.]

  [[I reseyvyd a lettre thhat come from yowe
  _spelling unchanged_]]


858

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[214-1]

_To John Paston, Esquyer, at Norwyche, or to Roose, dwellyng affor
Mestresse Pastonys gate, in Norwych._

[Sidenote: 1474 / NOV. 20]

Ryght wyrshypful and weell belovyd brother, I recomaunde me to yow,
letyng yow weet that I have comonyd with yowr ffreende Dawnson, and have
receyvyd yowr rynge off hym, and he hathe by myn advyce spoken with
hyr[214-2] ij. tymes; he tellythe me off hyr delyng and answers, whyche
iff they wer acordyng to hys seyng, a ffeynter lover than ye wolde, and
weell aghte to, take therin greet comffort, so that he myght haply slepe
the werse iij. nyghtys afftr. And suche delyng in parte as was bytwyen
my Lady W. and yowr ffreende Danson he wrote me a bylle theroff, whyche
I sende yow herwith; and that that longythe to me to doo therin, it
[_I ?_] shall nott ffayle to leeve all other bysynesse a parte.
Neverthelesse within iij. dayes, I hope so to deele herin, that I
suppose to sette yow in serteynte hoghe that ye shall fynde hyr ffor
evyr her afftr. It is so, as I undrestande, that ye be as besy on yowr
syde ffor yowr ffreende Dawnson, wheer as ye be, I praye God sende yow
bothe goode spede in thees werkys, whyche iff they be browte abowte iche
off yowe is moche beholden to other; yit were it pyte that suche crafty
wowers, as ye be bothe, scholde speede weell, but iff ye love trewly.

Item, as ffor Stoctons doghtr, she shall be weddyd in haste to Skeerne,
as she tolde hyrselffe to my sylke-mayde,[215-1] whyche makyth perte off
suche as she shall weer, to whom she brake hyr harte, and tolde hyr that
she sholde have hadde Master Paston, and my mayde wende it had been I
that she speke off; and with moor that the same Mester Paston kome wher
she was with xx. men, and wolde have taken hyr aweye. I tolde my mayde
that she lyed off me, and that I never spake with hyr in my lyff, ner
that I wolde not wedde hyr to have with hyr iij^ml. marke.

Item, as for Ebortons dowghtr, my brother Edmonde seythe, that he herde
never moor speche theroff syns yowr departyng, and that ye wolde that he
sholde nott breke, nor doo no thynge therin, but iff it come off theer
begynnyng.

Item, I had answer ffrom my Lorde[215-2] that he is my speciall goode
lorde, and that by wryghtyng; and as ffor Bernaye he sette hym in hys
owne wages ffor my sake, and that whan so ever I come to Caleys, I shall
ffynde all thyng ther as woll have it, and rather better than it was
heretoffor.

Item, the Kyng come to this towne on Wednysdaye; as ffor the Frenshe
Embassate that is heer, they come nott in the Kynges presence, by
lykehod, ffor men seye that the chyeff off them is he that poysonyd
bothe the Duke off Berry[216-1] and the Duke off Calabr.[216-2]

Item, ther was never mor lyklyhod that the Kyng shall goo ovyr thys next
yer than was nowe.

I praye yow remembre that I maye have the pewter vessell heddr by the
next karyer by the lattr ende off thys weke.

Item, I praye yow remembr so that I may have the bokys by the same tyme,
whyche my moodr seyde she wolde sende me by the next carier.

Wretyn at London, the Sondaye the xx. daye off Novembr, anno E. iiij^ti
xiiij^{o}.

  JOHN PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 214-1: [From Fenn, ii. 164.]]

    [Footnote 214-2: Apparently Lady Walgrave, hereafter referred to.
    She was the widow of Sir Richard Walgrave, Knight.]

    [Footnote 215-1: A person who made gowns of silk, etc., for both
    men and women, as appears from the manner in which she is here
    mentioned.--F.]

    [Footnote 215-2: I am not certain whether the Duke of Norfolk is
    here meant, or Lord Hastyngs, the then Governor of Calais.--F.]

    [Footnote 216-1: Charles, Duke of Berry and of Guienne, who was
    supposed to have been poisoned by order of his brother Lewis XI.
    in May 1472.]

    [Footnote 216-2: Nicholas of Anjou, Duke of Calabria and Lorraine,
    who died about the same time as the Duke of Guienne.]

  [[dwellyng affor Mestresse Pastonys gate
  _italic “d” misprinted as “a”_

  Sidenote: 1474 / NOV. 20
  _date supplied from body of letter_]]


859

ABSTRACT[216-3]

[Sidenote: 1474 / NOV. 29]

Norfolk and Suffolk Deeds, No. 33. ‘The agreement and accord between the
Bishop of Winton and John Paston, Knight, touching the building of the
College at Castre of seven priests and seven poor men, translated by
dispensation of the Pope to seven priests and seven poor scholars in
Magdalene College, and touching the lands of Sir John Fastolf. November
29, Edw. IV. 14.’

    [Footnote 216-3: [From MS. Index in Magd. Coll., Oxford.]]


860

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[216-4]

_To John Paston, Esquier._

[Sidenote: 1474 / DEC. 11]

Brother, I recomaunde me to yow, letyng yow weete that I have, lyke as I
promysyd yowe, I have doon my devoyr to know my Lady Walgraves stomacke,
whyche, as God helpe me, and to be pleyn to yowe, I ffynde in hyr no
mater nor cawse, that I myght tak comfort off. Sche will in nowyse
receyve, ner kepe yowr rynge with hyr, and yit I tolde hyr that sche
scholde not be any thynge bownde therby; but that I knew by yowr herte
off olde that I wyst weel ye wolde be glad to fforber the lesvest
[_dearest_] thynge that ye had in the worlde, whyche myght be dayly in
her presence, that sholde cawse hyr onys on a daye to remembr yow, but
itt wolde not be. She wolde nott therby, as she seyde, putte yow ner
kepe yow in any comffort therby. And mor ovyr, she preyed me, that I
sholde never take labor moor heer in, ffor she wolde holde hyr to suche
answer as she hadd geven yow to ffoor, wherwith she thowght bothe ye and
I wolde have holde us contente, had nott been the words off hyr suster
Geneffyeff.

When I undrestood all thys, and that over nyght she bad hyr that weent
bytwyen hyr and me byd me brynge with me hyr muskeball[217-1] which,
&c., than I aftr all thys axid iff she weer dyspleasyd with me ffor it,
and she seyde, naye.

Than I tolde hyr, that I had nott sent it yowe, ffor synne off my sowle;
and so I tolde hyr all, how I had wretyn to yow why that I wold nott
sende it yow, by cawse I wyst weell ye sholde have slepyd the werse; but
nowe, I tolde hyr, as God helpe me, that I wolde sende it yow, and gyffe
yow myn advyse nott to hope ovyr moche on hyr, whyche is ovyr harde an
hertyd lady ffor a yonge man to tryst on to; whyche I thowght that ffor
all my words, ye cowde nott ner wolde nott do ffor all myn advyce.

Yitt ageynwards she is nott dyspleasyd, nor fforbad me nott but that ye
sholde have the kepyng off hyr muskball; wherffor de ye with itt as ye
lyke. I wolde it hadd doon weel; by Good, I spake ffor yow soo, that in
ffeythe I trowe I kowde nott seye so weel ageyn.

Wherffor I sende yow herwith yowr rynge, and the onhappy muskeball. Also
make ye mater off it herafftr as ye kan, I am nott happy to wow nowther
ffor my selff ner noon other. I tolde hyr all the processe off the Lorde
Howarde and off yowr grewnds [_greyhounds_] as I kowde; all helpys
nott.[218-1]

    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

I her no worde off my vessell, ner off my boks; I mervayll. No mor.

Wretyn at London, the xj. daye of Decembr, anno E. iiij.^ti xiiij^{o}.

  J. P., K.

    [Footnote 216-4: [From Fenn, ii. 170.]]

    [Footnote 217-1: This muskball, or ball of perfume, seems to have
    been taken from Lady Walgrave by Sir John Paston in a jesting
    manner, to send to his brother as a present from her.--F.]

    [Footnote 218-1: ‘Here follows,’ says Fenn, ‘some displeasure at
    his uncle William’s proceedings in matters between them, etc., of
    no consequence.’]

  [[wherffor de ye with itt
  _text unchanged: error for “do”?_]]


861

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[218-2]

_To the ryght worshypfull John Paston, Esquier, at Norwych, or to hys
modr, Margreet Paston, in hys absence, in haste._

[Sidenote: 1475 / JAN. 17]

I recomande me to yow, praying yow hertely, that I maye have weetyng
when that my Lorde and Lady of Norffolk shalle be at London, and howgh
longe they shall tery theer, and in especiall my Lorde of Norffolk; ffor
uppon ther comyng to London wer it ffor me to be guydyd. Neverthelesse I
wolde be soory to come theer but iff I neds most. I thynke it wolde be
to yow ovyr erksom a labor to solycyte the maters atwyen them and me,
but iff I weer theer myselffe; wherffor, iff ye thynke it be convenyent
that I com thyddr, I praye yow sende me worde as hastely as ye maye, and
by what tyme ye thynke most convenyent, that I sholde be theer; and off
all suche coumfforte as ye ffynde or heer off the towardnesse theroff,
and when also that ye shall be theer yowr selffe. For it is so that as
to morow I purpose to ryde in to Flaundrys to purveye me off horse and
herneys, and percase I shall see the assege at Nwse[218-3] er I come
ageyn, iff I have tyme; wherffor, iff I so doo, by lyklyhod it woll be a
xiiij. dayes er I be heer ageyn; and afftr, as I heer ffrom yowe and
other ther uppon, that at the next passage, and God woll, I purpose to
come to London warde: God sende me goode spede; in cheff ffor the mater
above wretyn; and secondly, ffor to appoynt with the Kyng and my Lorde,
ffor suche retynwe as I sholde have now in thees werrys in to Frawnce;
wherffor I praye yow, in Norffolk and other places, comon with suche as
ye thynke lykly ffor yow and me, that ar dysposyd to take wages in
gentylmenns howsys and ellys wher, so that we maye be the moor redy,
when that nede is; neverthelesse at thys owr, I wolde be gladde to have
with me deyly iij. or iiij. mor than I have, suche as weer lykly; ffor I
lakke off my retynwe, that I have neer so many. I praye yow sende me som
tydyngs, suche as ye heer, and howghe that my brother Edmonde dothe.

For as ffor tydyngs heer, ther be but ffewe, saffe that the assege
lastyth stylle by the Duke off Burgoyn affoor Nuse, and the
Emperor[219-1] hathe besegyd also, not fferr from these, a castell, and
an other town in lyke wyse, wher in the Dukys men ben. And also, the
Frenshe Kynge, men seye, is comyn ryght to the water off Somme with
iiij^ml. [4000] spers; and som men trowe that he woll, at the daye off
brekyng off trewse, or ellys byffoor, sette uppon the Duks contreys
heer. When I heer moor, I shall sende yowe moor tydyngs.

The Kyngs inbassators, Sir Thomas Mongomere and the Master off the
Rolls[219-2] be comyng homwards ffrom Nuse; and as ffor me, I thynke
that I sholde be sek but iff I see it.

Syr John off Parre and William Berkeley com thys weye to Flaundrs ward
to by them horse and herneys, and [I] made Sir J. Parr goode cheer as I
cowde ffor yowr sake; and he tolde me, that ye made hym haulte cheer,
&c. at Norwyche. No moor.

Wretyn at Caleys, the xvij. daye off Janever, anno Edwardi iiij^ti
xiiij^o.

    [Footnote 218-2: [From Fenn, ii. 174.] ‘Though this letter,’ says
    Fenn, ‘has no signature, yet it is written by Sir John Paston,
    Knight.’]

    [Footnote 218-3: Neuss, not far from Düsseldorf, in the territory
    of Cologne, at this time besieged by Charles the Bold, Duke of
    Burgundy.]

    [Footnote 219-1: Frederick III. of Austria, Emperor of Germany.]

    [Footnote 219-2: Dr. John Morton, afterwards Bishop of Ely, Lord
    Chancellor, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Cardinal.]


862

MARGARET PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[220-1]

_To John Paston, Sqwyer, be thys delyveryd in hast._

Jh’s.[220-2]

[Sidenote: 1475 / JAN. 29]

I gret yow well, and send yow Goddes blyssyng and myn, letyng yow wet
that my cosyn Robard Clere was her with me thys weke, and told me that
he was nowt payd of the mony that ye know that was borowd of hys modyr
and of hym, but iiij^xx._li._ The xx_li._ that my plegges ly for ys on
payd. He seyd that he was desyryd to delyvere my plegges, and to have be
payd the xx_li._; but he wold not, tyll he had spokyn with me, because
of the promys that he had mad to me befor that he shuld not delyver them
to non withowt my assent. I seyd to hym that I suppose veryly that yowyr
brodyr hys a greyd with yowyr hunkyll that he shuld paye all the hole,
for I suppose he hath a swerte for ale that and more. I wold undyrstond
how yt ys, and how that my seyd cosyn shall be content, for I war loth
to lese my plegges; I wot yt well, yowyr good hunkyll wold ben in
possessyon with good well, but I wol not soo. I wold that ye shuld speke
with yowyr hunkyll ther in, and send me word in hast what he seet
[_saith_].

I marvyll, be my trowth, that I had no wrytyng fro yowyr brodyr, er he
departyd fro London, as he promysyd in the last lettyr that he sent me,
the wych was wretyn be for the Kynges comyng to Norwych; I went
[_expected_] veryly to have hard from hym ar [_ere_] thys tyme. I wold
ye shuld send hym word of yowyr hunkyles delyng in thys seyd mater, and
send me an ansswer ther off.

Recomaund me to yowyr grauntdam. I wold she war her in Norffolk, as well
at es as evyr I sy hyr, and as lytyll rewlyd be hyr son as evyr she was,
and than I wold hope that we alle shuld far the bettyr for hyr. Yt ys
told me that yowyr hunkyll hath mad gret menys and larg profyrs to John
Bakton to make a relesse to hym of Oxinhed. Whedyr that be don or nowt,
I wot nowt yet, but I shall wot in hast, yf I may.

I wold ye shuld spekyn with my Lord of Norwych, and a say to get a lysen
of hym to that I may have the sacrement her in the chapell, because yt
ys far to the chyrche, and I am sekly, and the parson ys oftyn owt. For
all maner of casweltes of me and myn, I wold havyt grauntyd, yf I myth.

Send me word yf ye her ony tydynges from yowyr brodyr how he doth of hys
seknes, and in odyr thynges, as farforth as ye know, as astely as ye
may. I thynk long tyll I her from hym for dyvers causys. God kepe yow.

Wretyn in hast at Mawdby, on the Satyrday next be for Candelmes Day.

Send me an ansswer of thys lettyr in hast, and odyr tydynges, &c.

  Be yowyr modyr.

My cosyn Robard told me that ther was mor than vij_li._ of the mony that
was payd hym that was ryght on rysty, and he cowd nowt havyt chaungyd.
He was on goodly servyd ther in.

    [Footnote 220-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter was
    evidently written on the same day as that immediately following.]

    [Footnote 220-2: This is the customary contraction of the name
    Jesus, which was frequently written at the head of a letter.]

  [[to have hard from hym ar [_ere_] thys tyme
  _printed without space between “ar” and brackets_]]


863

MARGARET PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[221-1]

_To Ser John Paston, Knyght, be thys delyveryd in hast._

Jh’s.[221-2]

[Sidenote: 1475]

Ryght welbelovyd son, I gret yow well, and send yow Goddes blyssyng and
myn, letyng yow wete that I marveyle that I have had no wrytyng from yow
sethyn ye sent me the lettyr that ye sent me be for the Kynges comyng to
Norwych; in the whyche lettyr ye wrot to me that ye shuld a wretyn azeyn
to me or ye shuld de part owt of London. It ys so that yowyr hunkyll
William hath do payd to my cosyn Robard Clere but iiij^xx._li._ of the
C_li._ and he wol no mor pay but yf [_unless_] he hath delyveraunc of my
plegges, the wych was leyd to plegg for xx^ti_li._; the wych ben bettyr.
I wot well, be cause of the good well that he owyt to me, as ye know, he
wold ben in possessyon therof. My cosyn, Robard Cler, was her with me
thys weke, and told me, that yf he wold a delyveryd them, he myth an had
the seyd xx_li._; but he seyd he wold nowt, tyll he had spokyn with me;
be my trowth I fynd hym ryght kyndly dysposyd to yow, and to me bothe;
and so I have desyryd hym to kepe styll the plegge in hys possessyon,
tyll I have word from yow how ye ar agreyd with yowyr hunkyll for the
payment of the seyd mony: I wen veryly that ye have fownd hym swerte for
alle, and yff ye have soo do, I wold ye shuld wryt to yowyr hunkyll
therfor, that I myth have my plegges ageyn, for I war loth that they
shuld com in hys fyngyers.

Item, as for Sporyl wood, be ffor the Kynges comyng into Norffolk,
I myth an had chapmen to abowtyd [_have bought it_] a gret [_in whole_]
for xij^xx. [_twelve score_] mark, and now ther wol no man by yt a gret,
bycause of the gret good that the pepyll ys leyd to for the Kyng; werfor
we ar a bowth to retaylyt as well as we may, and as well as yt can be
browth too; and I send yow word how we shall do as astely as I may. As
for yowyr barly in thys cuntre, yt cannot be sold above x_d._ or xj_d._;
that ys the gretest prys of barly her, and but yt be at a bettyr prys,
I purpose for to do yt malt. And as for mony, I cowd not get yet of
Pecok but iij_li._; and he seth that be than that the owt chargys be
boryn, and the repracion of the myll at Wyntyrton, we ar lyke to have
but lytyll mor mony besyd the barly. Malt ys sold her but for xiij_d._
and whet ij_s._ or xxvj_d._ at thys time, and otys xij_d._ Ther ys non
owtlod suffyrd to goo owth of thys cuntre as yet; the Kyng hath
comaundyd that ther shuld non gon owth of thys lond. I fer me that we
shall have ryth a straung ward [_world_]; God a mendyd, whan Hys wyll
ys. I thank yow for the flakons that ye sent me; they be ryght good, and
plesyth me ryght well: I shall be as good an huswyff for yow as I can,
and as I wold be for myselff. Send me word how ye doo of yowyr syknes
that ye had on yowyr hey [_eye_] and yowyr lege; and yff God wol nowt
suffyr yow to have helth, thank Hym therof, and takyt passhently, and
com hom a geyn to me, and we shall lyve to geddyr, as God woll geve us
grase to do; and as I have seyd to yow beffor thys, I wold ye war
delyveryd of my mastres A. H.,[223-1] and than I wold trost that ye
shuld do the bettyr.

As for the bokys that ye desyryd to have of Syr Jamys,[223-2] the best
of alle and the fayrest ys cleymyd; ner yt ys not in hys inventory.
I shall a say to get yt for yow, and I may; the prys of the todyr bokys,
besyd that, ys xx_s._ vj_d._ the wych I send yow a byll of. Yf ye lyk be
the prys of them, and ye wol have them, send me word. And also I pray
yow send me an ansswere of thys lettyr, be cause I thynk long seth I
hard from yow. God have yow in Hys kepyng.

Wretyn at Mawdby, on the Sattyrday nex be forn the Purificacion of owyr
Lady, the xiiij. yer of Kyng Edward the iiij^{t}.

  Yowyr Modyr.

  _Endorsed_--Anno xiiij^{o}.

    [Footnote 221-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]

    [Footnote 221-2: _See_ p. 220, Note 2.]

    [Footnote 223-1: Anne Haulte.]

    [Footnote 223-2: Sir James Gloys.]

  [[he hath delyveraunc of my plegges
  _spelling unchanged_]]


864

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[223-3]

_To hys brother John Paston, or to hy[s] oncle William Paston, in Werwyk
Lane, or to Edmond Paston, at the George, at Powlys Wharfe, to deliver
any of them._

[Sidenote: 1475 / FEB. 5]

Ryght worshypffull, I recomaunde me on to yow, letyng yow weete that I
thynke longe that I heer nott from yow syns Crystmesse, ner have no
serteyn knowleche whether that Towneshend hathe performyd hys promysse
or nott, ner off my brother Johnys beyng at London, ner off my Lord or
Lady off Norfolkes comyng to London, at whoys comyng sholde be the
cheffe labor and sewte that I or or any for me sholde labor. It was soo,
God thanke you bothe, that iche off yow, at my last beyng with yow,
grauntyd me to take labor uppon yow; and iche off yow, for the havyng
ageyn off my place in Castre. Now is it soo, that wher my verry purpose
was to have comyn to London now with the Master of the Rollys[224-1] and
Sir Thomas Mongomere, demyng to fynde the Kyng at the Parlement; and
also that my Lorde and Lady off Norfolk sholde nott by lyklyhod fayle to
be theer also: wherffor me thoght the tyme was convenyent; but it happyd
so that suche tydynges come hyddre off the Frenshe Kynges hasty comyng
in to thees marchys of Pykardye, whyche cawsyd my Lordes Depute and
Cownsell heer to desyr and charge me soo streyghtly, that in noo wyse I
maye, tyll I heer other tydynges, departe from hense. Notwithstondyng
the Marchall and Counsell heer have wretyne to my Lorde Lywe tenant for
me, and moor over desyryd bothe the Master of the Rollys and Sir T.
Mongomere to remembre my materes bothe to the Kynge and to my lorde, in
so moche that, iff the season be convenyent, both the seyd Master and
Syr T. Mongomere wille labore bothe the Kynge and my lorde to entrete my
Lorde off Norffolk, my lady hys wyff, and ther consell, to do for me all
that reason wyll; of whoys good willes and labor her in I ame better
ensuryd off, than I kan for lakke of leyser at thys tyme wryght yowe
wetyng off; wherffor I praye yow and iche of yow, iff the season be
convenyent, to take the labor, that theese jentyllmen maye do for me,
and to my proffyght, like as I feelle them dysposyd to doo; and moore
over I have somwhatt informyd them bothe ther in; and also that I maye
hastyly heer from yow, and iff it come to that any mony most be gevyn to
my Lorde or Lady off Norffolk ffor a plesyr herffor, I woll, uppon as I
heer from yow, come to yow in alle hast possible, all thynges leyde a
parte.

Item, iff any letter be requesyth to be hadde, in lyke forme as oonys
ther was from the Kyng to my Lorde off Norffolk, Sir T. Montgomere will
by your advyces opteyne yow suche one off yowr entents to my proffyghte
in the premyssys, and by thys my wryghtyng I bynde me to repaye yowe,
iff any suche letter or wryghtyng be opteynyd, what so ever it coste. No
more for lakke off leysor.

Wretyn at Caleys, the v. day of Feverer, Anno E. iiij. xiiij^{o}.

As for tydynges heer, my masteris th’embassatores, Sir T. Mongomere, and
the Master of the Rollys, kom streyght from the Duke at hys assege at
Nywysse, whyche wyll nott yitt be wone.

  Yowr JOHN PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 223-3: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]

    [Footnote 224-1: John Morton, afterwards Bishop of Ely.]

  [[labor and sewte that I or or any for me
  _text unchanged: printed at mid-line_]]


865

SIR JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[225-1]

_To Mestresse Margret Paston, at Norwyche, be thys delyveryd._

[Sidenote: 1475 / FEB. 22]

Please it yow to weete that I receyvyd a letter from yow, wretyn the
Saterdaye next byffor Candelmesse; for answer wheroff, lyke it yow to
weete, that as for the bokys that weer Sir James (God have hys sowle!),
I thynke best that they be styll with yow, tyll that I speke with yow my
selffe. My mynde is now nott most uppon bokes.

Item, as for xx_li._ that ye sey that yowr plate lythe for, it is so,
that I fownde my oncle William no sewerte therffor, as Playter and my
brother John bothe cowde enfforme yow; it was never desyryd of me, ner
the tolde me nott that any suche pledge laye for it, but that ye hadd
dyschargyd me of xx_li._ and chevysshyd it, and that ye sholde repaye it
in hast; wherin I woll do as ye woll, and as it pleasyth yow to sende me
wetyng.

Item, I ame sory that ye be no better payd off the xx_li._ that I had
off yowe, whyche ye sholde have receyvyd ageyn off my londes in Flegge.
Iff the markett be nott goode yit, I hope it shall be better; never the
lesse my wylle is that ye sholde have yowr holl xx_li._ ageyn, and not
lose j_d._ Wherffor if it be so that ye be mysse servyd ther, I beseche
yow off pacyence tyll the begynnyng of the next yeer, and iff aught be
behynd, ye shall receyve uppe the remenaunt then, for, as God helpe me,
I wolde be sory that ye lost moor for me; I have pytte yow to cost,
charge, and losse i nowge, God thanke yow of it, thoughe ye lose no
more. Wherffor iff Sporle woode sprynge any sylver or golde, it is my
wyll that fyrst of alle ye be yowr owne payer off all that is be hynde;
and next thatt, to paye myn oncle William vij^{xx}vj_li._ xiij_s._
iiij_d._ and besyd that, xvj_li._ lost uppon the chevysshaunce of
iiij^xx._li._; and so I owe viij^{xx.}ij_li._ xiij_s._ iiij_d._ Wherffor
I beseche yow to make hast in repayment heroff as fast as it wolle
growe, as my trust is in yowe.

Item, wher it pleasyd yow to weete of myn heele and amendyng; I thanke
Godde I ame in goode case, and as goode a full hooll, bothe off the
fevre, agwe off myn ie, myn legge, and myn heele, saff that I ame tendre
off all theese; and were nott goode rewle, full like to feell off iche
off them ryght soone; neverthelesse, God thanke yow off yowr large
profre, wheroff I wolde be ryght gladde iff I myght, for trobles and
other labor that I have takyn on me nowe in to Fraunce warde; for the
goode spede off me, and that jorneye, I beseche yow of yowr preyeres and
remembrance; and thatt jorney, with Goddes grace, ones doon, I purpose
verrely, with Goddes grace, therafftre to daunce atendaunce most abowt
yowr plesure and ease: and with Goddes grace, soone uppon Esterne, er
evyr I goo forthe, I hope to se yow, and fecche your blessynge. No moor
at thys tyme, but Jesus have yow in Hys kepyng.

Wretyn at Caleys, the xxij. daye of Feverer, anno E. iiij^ti xiiij^{o}.

  Yowr Sone,

  JOHN PASTON, K.

_On the back of the preceding letter is written in another hand, as
follows_:--

  Memorandum, that Syr John Paston owthe to William Paston, acordyng
  to the endenture made be twex them,--
    viij^{xx}ij_li._ xiij_s._ iiij_d._

  Wheroff payable the firste day of Octobre for Townsend, C. marke.

  Item, the xxvj. day off Novembre,--
    iiij^{xx.}xvj_li._

    [Footnote 225-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]

  [[Item, the xxvj. day off Novembre,--
  iiij^{xx.}xvj_li._
  _final . missing or invisible_]]


866

MARGARET PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[227-1]

[Sidenote: 1475 / MARCH 5]

John Paston, I send yow Godds blyssyng and myn, letyng yow wete, that I
hadd non er thys lettyr than on Sent Matheus Evyn; yf I myth a had an
massenger or thys tym I had sent yt yow. I con yow thank for the lettyr
that ye sent to my cosyn Calthorpp and me of the tydyngs; I wold ye
shuld do soo mor. As ye may remembyr that I spak to yow for the
xx^ti_li._ for my cosyn Clere, spek to yowr hunkyll therof, and send me
an answer therof in hast. And for the lycens that I spak to yow for, to
have the Sacrement in my Chapell, yf ye cannot getyt of the Busshop of
Norwych, getyt of the Busshop of Caunterbery, for that ys most swyr for
all plase. God kepe yow.

Wretyn on Mydlent Sunday.

    [Footnote 227-1: [From Fenn, ii. 178.] This letter was written on
    the back of Letter 861.]


867

RICHARD SOUTHWELL TO JOHN PASTON[227-2]

_To the right worshippfull, and my right feithfull gode cosin, John
Paston, Esquier._

[Sidenote: 1475 / MARCH 26]

Right worshippfull and my right feithfull gode cosin, I recomaunde me
unto you, and, as hertily as I can, thanke you of your right gentill and
kynde remembraunce, that I consceyve well by your late writyng that ye
have to me wardes, undeserved in dede, but not in will, so God helpe me,
as ye shuld weell knowe, if my power might accorde with my will. And,
cosin, in the mater that it liked you to remembre me in, bothe to my
worshipp and pleaser, I feere me that nouther my pouere doughter nor
pouere purs can nor may be to his pleaser; wold God outher might; and I
shuld take me right neere to his pleaser, savyng myself, I ensure you by
my trouth. And howe to understand his pleaser and disposicion therin,
I see no mean as thus advised, but if [_unless_] it might please you by
your wisdam to attempte it forther, as ye seme moste conveniente, and
theruppon I to be guyded by your gode advise, as the cas shall require;
wherin ye shall bynde me herefter to do that may be to your pleaser to
my power, and yette with no better will than I have had, so God help me,
Who have you ever in His kepinge, and sende you your hertes desire to
His pleaser; and if it pleas you to remembre further in the premisses,
I trust ye shall leese no labour on my pouere parte; howe be it I fere
me sore, as I be gan, bothe of my pouere doughter and purs.

Writon at Woderysyng, the morn efter Our Lady Day, in haste.

I require you this bill may be secrete.

  By your trewe cosin,

  RIC. SUTHWELL.

    [Footnote 227-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] Fenn thinks the
    gentleman here referred to was John Berney of Reedham, Esquire,
    who married Alice, daughter of Richard Southwell, Esquire, of Wood
    Rising, the writer of this letter. He accordingly dates it about
    the year 1475, and I see no reason to question his opinion.]


868

JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[228-1]

_To my ryght worchepfull modyr, Margaret Paston, at Mawtby._

[Sidenote: 1475(?) / [MAR. 29]]

Ryght worchepfull modyr, aftyr all humbyll recomendacyons, as lowely as
I can I beseche yow of your blyssyng. Pleasyt yow to wete that late
yester nyght I cam to Norwyche, purposeing to have been as thys day with
yow at Mawtby, but it is so that I may not hold my purpose, for he that
shall pay me my quarter wagys for me and my retenew, is in Norwyche, and
waytyth ourly when hys money shall com to hym. It is oon Edmund Bowen of
the Cheker, a specyall frend of myn, and he avysyth me to tery tyll the
money be com, lest that I be unpayed, for who comyth fyrst to the mylle,
fyrst must grynd.

And as I was wryghtyng thys byll, on of the gromys of my lords chambyr
cam to me, and told me, that my lady wyll be here in Norwyche to morow
at nyght towards Walsyngham, whyche shall, I wot well, be a nother lett
to me; but I had more need to be other wyse ocupyed then to awayte on
ladyse, for ther is as yett, I trowe, no sperre that shall go over the
see, so evyll horsyd as I am. But it is told me that Rychard Call hathe
a good horse to sell, and on John Becher of Oxborough hathe an other;
and if it myght please yow to geve Syme leve to ryd in to that contre at
my cost, and in your name, seying that ye wyll geve on of your sonys an
horse, desyryng hym that he wyll geve yow a penyworthe for a peny, and
he shall, and the pryse be resonabyll, hold hym pleasyd with your
payment ought of my purse, thow he knowe it not or hys horse depert fro
hys lands. Modyr, I bese[che] yow, and it may please yow to geve Syme
leve to ryde on thys message in your name, that he may be here with me
to morow in the mornyng be tymys, for wer I onys horsyd, I trowe I wer
as ferforthe redy as some of my neyghborows. I herd a lytyll word that
ye purposeid to be here in Norwyche thys next week. I prey God it be
thys week. Modyr, beseche yow that I may have an answer to morow at the
ferthest of thys mater, and of eny other servyse that it please yow to
comand me, whyche I wyll [be] at all seasons redy to acomplyshe with
Gods grace, Whom I beseche to preserve yow and yours.

Wretyn at Norwyche, thys Wednysday in Estern Week.

  By your sone and servaunt,

  J. P.

    [Footnote 228-1: [From Fenn, iv. 444.] This letter was evidently
    written in 1475, when John Paston and one or more of his younger
    brothers were about to go over to France with the King’s
    army.--_See_ Letter 871. Margaret Paston was at that time
    continually resident at Mautby.]


869

WILLIAM PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[230-1]

_To my right worshupfull sistir, Margaret Paston._

[Sidenote: 1475 / APRIL 7]

Right worshupfull sustir, I recomaunde me to you, praying you to
undirstonde, the priour of Bromeholme hath sent ayen to me for xx_li._;
and my cosyn William Whyte desired me to wryte to you for the rewarde
that was offird hym to his churche and xx_li._ of my brothirs goodys to
be lent hym upon sufficient suertee, and by a yeeris ende payd ayen; he
hath and may doo for you and for my nevewe, Sir John, in many thynges,
and is his kynnesman, and it were a gode frendely dede and no jopardy
nor hurt. The Abbot of Wymondham hath sent to me too tymes. Frendship
may not hang by the wynde, nor for faire eyne, but causis must be
shewid; men wene that I hadd your coffers and my brothirs and maistir
Fastolffes in myne awarde, and that ye wote wele, &c. Send your avise to
my nevewe, Sir John, by the next messynger. Ye sent to me oonys for the
same mater, but I may not leene my money to defende othir men is causis;
your discrecion (?) thenkith that it were no reason. I have tolde them
your saying; and as it is s[o] that ye may nat come to the coffers but
all be togedir. Therfor ye must sende to my nevewe and to Arblastir how
ye will have this answerd; for the Abbot will be heere on Monday at the
sene, and labour must bee desired the next terme. Hit nedis nat to put
you in remembrance of my mater touchyng my Fadirs soule, my modir and
me, and God kepe you. Wreton at Norwich the vij^th day of Aprill.

I have tolde thes folkis, as ye have seid to me all weys, that your will
is gode, but that ye may not come theretoo withoute th’assent of all
your felowes.

Item, I pray you remembre the obligacion that Wix hath, and that I may
have my money of the parsone of Maudeby.

  By your brothir,

  WILLIAM PASTON.

    [Footnote 230-1: [Add. MS. 34,889, f. 215.] As Margaret Paston, at
    the date of this letter, is not at Norwich and her son Sir John
    seems to be there, we may infer that it was written in the year
    1475. _See_ No. 868 (preliminary note).]


870

EDMUND PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[231-1]

_To John Paston, Esquyer._

[Sidenote: 1475(?) / [MAY 13]]

Syr, I recummawnd me to zow. Please yt zow to wette that my modyr hathe
causyd me to putte Gregory owte of my servyse, as, God help, I wrythe to
zow the very cause why. Yt happyd hym to have a knavys loste, in pleyn
termes to swhyve a quene, and so dyd in the Konyneclosse. Yt fortunyd
hym to be a spyed be ij. plowemen of my modyrs, whyche werne as fayne as
he of that mater, and desyerd hym to have parte, and as kompany
requeryd, seyd not nay; in so myche that the plowemen had her alle a
nythe in ther stabylle, and Gregory was clere delyvered of her, and as
he swherys had not a do with her within my modyrs place. Not with
standdyng my modyr thynkks that he was grownd of that matier; wherfor
ther is no remedy but he moste a voyde. And in so myche that at the
laste tyme that ze wer her, [ye] desyerd hym of me, yf that he schuld
departe from me, I send zow the very cawse of hys departyng, as my modyr
sethe; but I am in serteyn the contrary is true. Yt is nomor but that he
can not plese all partys. But that jantylman[231-2] is hys woords Lord,
he hathe seyd that he woold lyfte them whom that hym plese, and as that
scheweyt welle, he lyftyd on [_one_] xiiij. myle in a mornyng, and nowe
he hath ben caw sar of hys lyfte, I wot not how far, but yf that ze be
hys better master; but and we a mong us geve not hym a lyfte, I pray God
that we never thryve. And that is hys intente, I trowe, to bryng us to;
wherfor I requer zow, yf that yt plese zow to have hym, that ze wylle be
the better master to hym for my sake, for I am he that is as sory to
departe from hym as any man on lyve from hys servant, and be my trowthe,
as farforthe as I knowe, he is as true as any on lyve.

I troste my fortune schale be better than ever to leve thus her; but yf
I wer hens wards, I ensuer zow I wold not schange for none that I knowe.
He is profytabylle on dyvers thynggs as ze knowe welle.

Ther has ben a gret breke be twyx Calle and me, as I schal enforme zow
at my coming, wyche schalle be on Wedynsday next be the grace of God,
who preserve zow.

Wretyn at Mawteby, on Wyteson eve.

  EDMOND PASTON.

    [Footnote 231-1: [From Fenn, iii. 426.] This letter was wrongly
    attributed by Fenn to Edmund Paston, son of the Judge. It is in
    the hand of the Judge’s grandson, also named Edmund, and was
    written at a time when his mother Margaret was living at Mautby,
    where he, the writer, was also at the time, though he expected to
    join his brother John, to whom he writes, in the following week.
    These circumstances strongly suggest that it was written in 1475,
    when Margaret Paston certainly was residing at Mautby, as we find
    Edmund Paston with his brother John in London a month later
    preparing to go over to Calais. _See_ No. 873. Whitsun Eve in 1475
    would be the 13th May.]

    [Footnote 231-2: Fenn supposes the person alluded to to be the
    priest, James Gloys.]


871

MARGARET PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[232-1]

_Un to Syr John Paston, be this delyvered in hast._

[Sidenote: 1475 / MAY 23]

Ryght welbelovyd son, I grete you well, and send you Cristes blissyng
and myne, desyringe to know how ye faire. I mervaile that I have herd no
tydynges from you sythe ye sent me the lettyr of an answere of the
xx_li._ the which I have layde pleages for to my cosyn Cleere, the which
letter was wryten the xxij^ty day of Februar; and as for that money,
I can not gete no lenger day therof than Mydsomer, or fourte nyght
after; and towardys that money, and the xx^ty_li._ that I send yow by
syde to London by Sym, I have receyved no mor money of yowres, but as
moch as I send yow wryten in this letter. And as for any discharge that
I promysed at the boroeng off the xx^ti_li._ when I leyde the pleages
ther fore, I thought not but that your uncle shuld a boroed them owte,
and I to have had my pleages, as well as he his; never the less I shall
be the warer how I shall dele here aftyr. By my trowth, I wote not how
to do ther fore; the Kyng goth so nere us in this cuntre, both to pooer
and ryche, that I wote not how we shall lyff, but yff [_unless_] the
world amend. God amend it, whan His wyll is. We[233-1] can nother sell
corne ner catell to no good preve. Malt is here but at x_d._ a comb;
wheete, a comb xxviij_d._; ootes, a comb x_d._; and ther of is but
lytell to geet here at thys tyme. William Pecok shall send you a byll
what he hath payde for yow for ij. taskes at this tyme; and how he hath
purveyde for the remnaunte of your corne; and also off other thynges
that be necessary that shuld be purveyd for in your absence. Send me
word also whome ye wyll desyre to do for yow in this contre, or ellys
where in your absence; and wryte to them to do for yow, and they wyll be
the better wylled to do for yow; and I wyll do my devyr for yow also, as
well as I can.

The somma off money that I have receyvyd off Wylliam Pecok:--First,
xl_s._ off Runnham. Item, off Bastwyk, xx_s._ Item, off Runnham, xx_s._
Item, off him for barly at Runnham, xx_s._ Item, off the fyschynge at
Bastwyke, xiij_s._ iiij_d._ Item, for barely sold at Runnham, viij_s._
Summa totalis, vj_li._ xvj_d._

Item, I have receyvyd of Ric. Calle, of Sporle wodd, xxvj_s._ viij_d._,
and more shall I hope here aftyr within short tyme; as I receyve for
yow, I hope to yeff yow a trew acownt; and this is all that I have
receyvyd for yow zytt, sen ye departyd hens. God bryng yow well ageyn to
this contre, to His pleasans, and to your wurshyp and profyzt.

Wryten at Mawteby, the xxiij^ty day of May, and the Tewsday next afftyr
Trinyte Sonday.

For Goddes love, and your brether go over the see, avyse them as ye
thynk best for her [_their_] save garde. For some of them be but yonge
sawgeres, and wote full lytyll what yt meneth to be as a sauger, nor for
to endure to do as a sawger shuld do. God save yow all, and send me good
tythynges of yow all. And send ye me word in hast how ye doo, for I
thynk longe to I here off yow.

  Be youre Modyr.

Item, I wold not in no wyse that ye shuld nother sell nor sett to pleage
that ye have in Runnham, what som ever fortune of the remnaund; for yt
is a praty thyng, and resonable well payde, and nere thys towne. I wold
be ryght sory that ye shuld for bere that; I had lever ye for bore that
your uncle hath to morgage than that.

    [Footnote 232-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter is endorsed
    ‘Mens’ Maii, anno xv^{o}.’ The date is confirmed by the fact that
    in 1475 the Tuesday after Trinity Sunday was the 23rd of May.]

    [Footnote 233-1: _We._ Originally written _I_, and corrected.]

  [[the xx^ty_li._ that I send yow by syde
  _spelling unchanged_]]


872

ABSTRACTS[234-1]

NORFOLK AND SUFFOLK DEEDS, No. 13.

[Sidenote: 1475 / MAY 28]

‘Johannes Paston miles relaxat Willielmo Wynton’ episc. et aliis totum
jus de et in manerio de Tichwell, Essex in Hickling, Guton, Beyton,
Newton, Calcotes in Fretton, Leyestoft, Habeland, Brodeston, et
Gorleston. Maii 28, Edw. IV. 15.’

No. 32.

‘Charta Johannis Paston militis de terris Johannis Fastolf pert.
prædict. Johanni, et continens concessionem quarundam evidentiarum
episcopo Winton’, et relaxationem orationum, actionum, et demandarum
versus prædictum episcopum. Maii 28, Edw. IV. 15.’

    [Footnote 234-1: [From MS. Index in Magd. Coll., Oxford.]]

  [[Footnote 234-1
  ... Magd. Coll., Oxford.]
  _text has “Oxford].”_]]


873

JOHN PASTON TO JOHN AND EDMUND PASTON[235-1]

_To John Paston, or to hys brother Edmond Paston, at the George, at
Powles Wharf._

[Sidenote: 1475 / JUNE 13]

Brother Edmonde, it is soo that I heer telle that ye be in hope to come
hyddre, and to be in suche wages as ye schall come lyve lyke a
jentylman, wheroff I wolde be gladde. Wherffor, for yowr better speede,
I lete you weete that Heugh Beamond is deed; wherffor I wolde ye had hys
roome nowe or never, iff ye can brynge it abowt; ellys iff ye dispose
yowe to abyde in Inglonde, syns it is so that the Bysshop of
Lynkolne[235-2] is Chaunceler, hys servyse is the meter for yow; he is
next neyghbour to Norfolk off any astate. God sende yow some good warde
of hys.

I praye you, iff yowr leyser be ther aftre to remembre Towneshende, that
he, with the advyse and assystence of my Master of the Rollys,[235-3]
have one daye off marche with the slawe Bysshop of Wynchester, that he
maye kepe me hys promyse, that is to seye, to entrete the Duke and
Duchesse of Norffolk for Caster. He promysed to doo it, and to ley owt
an C_li._ for the same.

Item, I praye yow sende me some tydynges within v. dayes aftre that ye
see thys bylle.

Wretyn at Caleys, the xiij. daye off June.

  JOHN PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 235-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter must have
    been written in the year 1475, when, as will be seen by No. 871,
    some of Sir John Paston’s brothers, among whom doubtless were both
    John and Edmund, to whom this letter is addressed, were going over
    to Calais. The Bishop of Lincoln (Rotherham) was Chancellor in
    1475. It is true the Great Seal was taken from him on the 27th
    April, and given to Alcock, Bishop of Rochester, until the 28th
    September, when it was restored to Rotherham. But it is certain
    this letter could not have been written in a later year, as the
    Duke of Norfolk died in January 1476.]

    [Footnote 235-2: Thomas Rotherham.]

    [Footnote 235-3: _See_ p. 219, Note 2.]

  [[JOHN PASTON TO ...
  _text unchanged: apparent error for “SIR JOHN”_]]


874

MARGARET PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[236-1]

_To the right worshipffull Sir John Paston, Knyght, in haste._

[Sidenote: 1475 / AUG. 10]

Right welbeloved sone, &c. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . .[236-2]

As for tidyngs here in this contre, we have non, but that the contry is
bareyn of money; and that my Lady of Yorke[236-3] and all her howsold is
here at Sent Benetts,[236-4] and purposed to abide there stille, til the
Kynge come from be yonde the see, and lenger if she like the eyre ther,
as it is seide.

I thynke ryght longe tille I here some tidyngs for [_quære_, from?] you
and from your brethren. I prey God sende you and al your company goode
spede in your journeys, to His plesure, and to your worshippes and
profights.

Wreten at Mauteby, on Sen Lawrens Even, the xv. yere of the regne of
Kyng E. the iiijth.

  Be yor Moder.

    [Footnote 236-1: [From Fenn, ii. 180.]]

    [Footnote 236-2: The chief part of this letter relates to Sir John
    Paston’s private affairs, his rents and lands, and informs him
    that William Jenney had entered into Holme Halle, in Filby, ‘in
    the ryght and titell of his douterlawe, weche was Boys doughter,’
    etc.--F.]

    [Footnote 236-3: Cecily, Duchess of York, daughter of Ralph
    Neville, Earl of Westmoreland, was the widow of Richard
    Plantagenet, Duke of York, and mother of King Edward IV., etc. She
    died in 1495, and was buried near her husband in the college of
    Fotheringay.--F.]

    [Footnote 236-4: The Abbey of St. Bennet at Holm.]


875

SIR JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[237-1]

_To Mestresse Margret Paston, at Norwyche._

[Sidenote: 1475 / SEPT. 11]

Ryght reverend and my most tendre and kynde moodre, I recomaunde me to
yow. Please it yow to weete that, blessyd be God, thys wyage of the
Kynges is fynysshyd for thys tyme, and alle the Kynges ost is comen to
Caleys as on Mondaye last past, that is to seye, the iiij. daye of
Septembre; and at thys daye many of hys host be passyd the see in to
Inglond ageyn, and in especiall my Lorde off Norffolk and my bretheryn.

Item, I was in goode hope to have hadde Caster ageyn. The Kynge spake to
my Lorde off Norffolk for it, and it was full lyke to have comyn; but in
conclusyon it is delayed tyll this next terme, by whyche tyme the Kynge
hat comaundyd hym to take advyce off hys councell, and to be sywer that
hys tytle be goode, or ellys the Kyng hathe asserteynyd hym that for any
favor he most do me ryght and justyce, &c.

And iff Caster hadde comen, by my feythe I had comyn streyhte home.
Notwithstondyng, iff I may do yow servyce or eese, as ye and I have
comonyd heer to foor, aftre as I heer from yow, as God helpe me,
I purpose to leeffe alle heer, and come home to yow, and be yowr
hosbonde and balyff; wher in I spake to my brother John to telle yow
myn advyce.

I also mysselyke somwhat the heyr heer; for by my trowte I was in goode
heele whan I come hyddre, and all hooll, and to my wetyng I hadde never
a better stomake in my lyffe, and now with in viij. dayes I am crasyd
ageyn. I suppose that I most be at London at Mychelmesse, and ther to
purveye for payment for myn oncle William, by whyche tyme I praye yow
that I may heer from yow and off yowr advyce and helpe, iff any thynge
be growyn off Sporle woode. For had nott yit that danger have been,
I mygh yit have ben at home with yow at thys daye, or with in vij. dayes
aftre. No more, but I beseche Jesus have yow in kepyng.

Wretyn at Caleys, the xj. daye of Septembre.

  JOHN PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 237-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] It is evident that this
    letter was written after the return of King Edward IV. from France
    in 1475.]


876

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[238-1]

_To the ryght worchepfull Sir John Paston, Knyght, lodgyd at the George,
by Powlys Wherf, in London._

[Sidenote: 1475 / OCT. 10]

Ryght werchepfull sir, I recomand me to yow, sertyfying yow that I have
comonyd with Barnard and other your wellwyllers with my Lord of
Norffolk, whyche avise me that ye shold, for your nyghest meane to get
Caster a yen, labore to get a lettre fro the Kyng dyrect to R.
Sothewell, Jamys Hubbard, and other of my lordys consayll being, and to
iche of theym; and in the seyd letter to lete theym have knowlage that
the Kyng mevyd to my lord of the seyd mater beyond the see, and hough my
lord answerd the Kyng that at hys comyng in to Inglond he wold meve to
hys seyd consayll of the seyd mater, and geve the Kyng an answer.
Wherfor the Kyng in the seyd lettyr must streyghtly charge theym, and
iche of theym, to comon with my lord in the seyd mater in syche wyse
that the Kyng may be sertyfyed of an answer fro my lord and theym at the
ferthest by _crastino Animarum_;[238-2] for Suthewell nor Jamys Hubbard
shall not be at London befor Halowmass, and thys is the best wey that ye
may take, as we thynke here.

My lady sweryth, and so dothe Barnard on hyr behalff, that she wold as
fayne ye had it as eny body; notwithstandyng she seyd not so to me,
sythe I cam hom, for I spak not with hyr but onys sythe I sye yow last.
Yet she lythe in Norwyche, and shall do tyll she be delyverd; but I have
be seek ever sythe I cam on thys syd the see, but I trust hastyly to
amend for all my seknesse that I had at Caleys, and sythe I cam over
also, cam but of cold. But I was never so well armyd for the werre as I
have now armyd me for cold; wherfor I avyse yow, take exampyll by me, if
it happyn yow to be seek, as ye wer when I was at Caleys, in eny wyse
kepe yow warme. I weene Herry Woodhous nor Jamys Arblaster ware never at
onys so many cotys, hose, and botewx as I doo, or ellys by God we had
gone therfor. What we shall yet I can not sey, but I bere me bold on ij.
dayes amendyng.

My modyr sendyth yow Godes blyssing and hers, and she wold fayne have
yow at home with hyr; and if ye be onys mette, she tellyth me ye shall
not lyghtly depart tyll dethe depart yow.

As I was wryghtyng thys lettyr, on told me that the Kyng shold be at
Walsyngham thys next.[239-1] If it be so, it wer best for yow to awayte
on the Kyng all the wey, and if ye have not men and horse i nowghe I
shall send yow. Do as ye thynk best; and as ye wyll have me to do, send
me your avyse, and I shall accomplyshe it to my power, with Godes grace,
Who preserve yow.

Wretyn at Norwyche, the x. day of October, anno xv^o E. iiij^{ti}.

  P. J.[239-2]

    [Footnote 238-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]

    [Footnote 238-2: The Morrow of All Souls, _i.e._ 3rd November.]

    [Footnote 239-1: So in MS. _Qu._, the word ‘week’ omitted?]

    [Footnote 239-2: It is curious that John Paston has here reversed
    his initials.]


877

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[239-3]

_To Sir John Paston, Knyght, lodgyd at the George, by Powlys Wherff, in
London._

[Sidenote: 1475 / OCT. 23]

Aftyr all dwtes of recomendacyon, please it yow to undyrstand that I
have spoken with my lady[239-4] sythe I wrot to yow last; and she told
me that the Kyng had no syche woordys to my lord for Caster, as ye told
me; but she seyth that the Kyng axid my lord at hys departyng fro
Caleys, how he wold deele with Caster, and my lord answerd nevyr a
woord.

Sir W. Brandon[240-1] stood by, and the Kyng axid hym what my lord wold
do in that mater; seying that he had comandyd hym befor tyme to meve my
lord with that mater, and Sir W. Brandon gave the Kyng to answer that he
had doone so; then the Kyng axid Sir W. B. what my lordys answer was to
hym, and Sir W. B. told the Kyng that my lords answer was that the Kyng
shold as soone have hys lyff as that place; and then the Kyng axid my
lord whedyr he seyd so or nought, and my lord seyd, yee. And the Kyng
seyd not a woord ayen, but tornyd hys bak, and went hys wey; but my lady
told me, and the Kyng had spokyn any woord in the world aftyr that to my
lord, my lord wold not have seyd hym nay. And I have gevyn my lady
warnyng that I wyll do my lord no more serveys; but er we partyd, she
mad me to make hyr promess that I shold let hyr have knowlege er I
fastonyd myselff in eny other servysse; and so I departyd, and sye hyr
not syness, nor nought purpose to doo, tyll I spek with yow.

I prey yow bryng home some hattys with yow, or and ye come not hastyly,
send me on, &c., and I shall pay yow for it a comb otys[240-2] when ye
come home.

My modyr wold fayn have yow at Mawtby; she rode thydyr ought of Norwyche
on Saturday last past, to purvey your lodgyng redy ayenst your comyng.

I have been ryght seek ayen sythe I wroote to yow last, and thys same
day have I ben pessyng seek; it wyll not ought of my stomak by no mean.
I am undon. I may not ete halff i nough, when I have most hungyr, I am
so well dyettyd, and yet it wyll not be. God send yow heele, for [I]
have non iij. dayes to gedyr, do the best I can.

Wretyn at Norwyche, the Monday next be for Seynt Simone and Jude,[240-3]
anno E. iiij. xv^{o}.

  J. P.

    [Footnote 239-3: [From Fenn, ii. 182.]]

    [Footnote 239-4: The Duchess of Norfolk.]

    [Footnote 240-1: Sir William Brandon was the grandfather of Henry
    VIII.’s favourite, Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk. Footnote 2 on
    p. 156, taken from Fenn, is wrong. Charles Brandon’s father, who
    was slain at Bosworth, was another Sir William, knighted by the
    Earl of Richmond before the battle.]

    [Footnote 240-2: In 1475 a comb of oats sold for 11_d._; we have
    therefore the value of a hat in this reign.--F. In No. 871 the
    price of oats is given as 10_d._ a comb, but the markets are
    considered to be bad.]

    [Footnote 240-3: 28th of October.]


878

JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[241-1]

[Sidenote: 1475]

Aftyr all dewtes of recomendacyon, in as humbyll wyse as I can,
I beseche yow of your blyssyng. The cheff cause that I wryght to yow for
at thys season is, for that I undyrstand that my lady[241-2] wold be
ryght glad to have yow a bought hyr at hyr labore; in so myche that she
hathe axyd the questyon of dyvers gentyllwomen whedyr they thought that
ye wold awayte on hyr at that season or nought, and they answerd that
they durst sey that ye wold, with ryght good wyll, awayte on hyr at that
tyme, and at all other seasons that she wold comand yow. And so I thynk
that my lady wyll send for yow; and if it wer your ease to be here,
I wold be ryght glad that ye myght be here, for I thynk your being here
shold do gret good to my brodyrs maters that he hathe to sped with hyr.
Wherfor, for Godes sake, have your horse and all your gere redy with
yow, whersoever ye be, ought or at home, and as for men, ye shall nott
need many, for I wyll come for yow, and awayte on yow my sylf, and on or
ij. with me; but I had need to undyrstand wher to fynd yow, or ellys I
shall happyly seeke yow at Mautby, when ye be at Freton, and my lady
myght then fortune to be ferforthe on hyr jorney or ye cam, if she wer
as swyfte as ye wer onys on Good Fryday.

And as for the mater in the latter end of my brodyr Sir Johnys lettyr,
me thynk he takyth a wronge wey, if he go so to werk; for as for the
peopyll here, I undyrstand non other but that all folkys here be ryght
well dysposyd towardes that mater, fro the hyghest degre to the lowest,
except Robart Brandon and John Colvyll; and it is a grete lyklyhod that
the grettest body is well dysposyd towardes that mater, in as myche as
they wold put yow to the labore above wretyn, and if they wer not,
I thynk they wold not put yow to that labore.

Also here was here with me yesterday a man fro the Priour of Bromholme
to lete me have knowlage of the ille speche whyche is in the contre now
of new, that the tombe is not mad; and also he seythe that the clothe
that lythe over the grave is all toryn and rotyn, and is not worth
ij_d._, and he seythe he hathe pachyd it onys or twyis. Wherfor the
Pryour hathe sent to yow at the leest to send thedyr a newe clothe a
yenst Estern.

Also Mastyr Sloley prayith yow, for Godes sake, and ye wyll do non
almess of tylle [_tile_] that he myght borow some of yow tyll he may bye
some, and pay yow ayen; for on [_one_] the fayrist chambyrs of the
Fryers, standyth half oncoverd for defaulte of tylle, for her is yett
non to get for no money. And the Holy Trynyte have yow in kepyng.

At Norwyche, thys Twysday.

  Your sone and humbyll servaunt,

  J. PASTON.

    [Footnote 241-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter seems to
    have been written shortly before the confinement of the Duchess of
    Norfolk in December 1475.]

    [Footnote 241-2: The Duchess of Norfolk.]


879

SIR JOHN PASTON TO EDWARD IV.[242-1]

_[To the King] our souverain Lord._

[Sidenote: 1475]

[SHEWETH] unto your highnesse your feythful liegeman and servaunt, John
Paston, Knight, that wher Sir William Yelverton, William Jenney, and
Thomas Howes were infeffed in certain . . . . . [to the] use of your
said suppliaunt, they of grat malice confetered with oon or ij. of the
counsell of my lord the Duc of Norffolk, caused the same Duc to clayme
tytle unto [the mano]ir of Caster and other lands of your said
suppliant, wherinne the said Yelverton and his coofeffees wer infeffed,
contrary to th’entent and wille that thei wer enfeffed for; upon whiche
title the said Duc with great force asseyed and entred the said manoir
of Castre and other lands of your said suppliant, putting hym from the
lawful possession and estate that he had in the same, and also take from
him vj^c. shepe and xxx. nete, and the same, with other stuf and
ordinaunces longing to the same manoir, of the value of C_li._ toke and
caryed awey, and the said manoir diffaced, hurt, and appeired, so that
it coude not be repaired with CC. marc. Also the revenues of the said
lands by the space of iij. yeres, to the value of vij^xx._li._, the same
my lord the Duke receyved, and the owtrents of the same never payed,
whiche great trouble was like to be the undoing of your said suppliant;
wherfor he was fayn to sue to the said Duc and lord by the meanes of his
godsip the Bisshop of Wynchestre, whiche was in his special favour; at
whos contemplacion, and for v^c. [500] marc whiche the same your
suppliant payed unto the same Duc, he graunted him to have agen his said
manoir and lands, and to restor him to the possession of the same,
whiche was so doen. And your said suppliant being in peasible
possession, my said lord the Duc and his cofeffees, Sir William Brandon,
Thomas Hoo, Rauf Ashton, and other, at the desir of my said lord,
relessed their estate and interesse, as wel under my said lordes sele as
under their own sele. Wherupon your said besecher continued in
possession but half a yer; at whiche time he was chargid in reparacions
to the somme of C. marc, and payed the owt rents dewe by the space of
the said iij. yer to the some of xl_li._ That doon, my said lord, by
sinistre motive and advice, with force agen entred the said manoir and
other lands aforsaid with alle stuf of howshold being in the same manoir
to the value of C. marc, and so long time hath kept and rejoysed the
revenues of the said lands, and in chief the said manoir, to the value
of vj^xx._li._ by the space of iiij. yer and mor; for redresse wherof
yor said suppliant hath this said space of iiij. yer sued to my said
lord and his counsell, and of alle that time the same my lord wold never
suffre him to come in his presence, ne here him, ne noon other for him
to declair or shewe his grief. And furthermor whanne your said besecher
hath sued to the counsel of my said lord, and desired them to move his
lordship therinne, and to answer him resonably and according to right,
they answered that thei have shewed my said lord his request, and that
he was, and is alwey, so moved and displesed with them, that thei dar
nomor move him therinne. And thus yor said suppliant hath loste alle his
coste and labour, to his charge by his feyth this iiij. yer in his sute,
the somme of v^c. marc, and now is owt of remedye, without your
habundant grace be shewed in that behalve, in somoche as he is not of
power t’attempt your lawes ayenst so mighty and noble estate, nor
t’abide the disples of him. Wherfor please it your moost noble grace, at
the reverence of God, to move my said lord to withdrawe the affeccion
whiche he so hath to the said manoir and lands, and to suffre your said
besecher to have and enjoye the possession of the same according
to right; and he at your commandment shal relesse unto my said
lord alle the damages above wretyn, whiche amount to the somme of
m^{l.}ccc.liij_li._ vj_s._ viij_d._, and in time to come, with Goddes
grace, be the mor hable to do you service, and also specially preye to
God for the conservacion of your moost noble persone and estate royall.

  _Endorsed in a later hand_-- . . . . Paston mil. Regi pro . . . .
  . . . . . Norff. in . . . . . de Caister.

    [Footnote 242-1: [From a MS. in the Bodleian Library.] The Castle
    of Caister was surrendered to the Duke of Norfolk in September
    1469, but he must have been taking the rents of the manor for a
    year or two before. From what is stated in this petition, the Duke
    must have given it up again in the end of the year 1470, _i.e._
    during the restoration of Henry VI.; but he entered again after
    half a year, and the date of this second entry is given by William
    Worcester as the 23rd June 1471. After this, the petition says, he
    kept possession for four years and more, so that the date of the
    document must be towards the close of the year 1475. The Duke died
    on the 17th January 1476.]


880

ABSTRACT[244-1]

ROBERT WHYNBERGH TO SIR JOHN PASTON

Has ridden 100 miles to get out the obligation of Craksheld and Salter.
Has been opposed by Mr. Lovell, as they are his tenants. Understands it
is in my lord’s closet, and the tenants are warned to pay no money
without it. They keep from him the farm of the Priors Maner as well as
Strehalle.[244-2] Desires him to write to Mr. William Paston to inform
my lord of a wrongful distress taken by John Markham at Strehall in
Cressingham, which is held of the King’s manor of Necton. They took
cattle in lambing time in March, in the 14th year of this King, ‘and put
Craksheld and Salter in such fear of losing of their cattle that they
were bound to my lord by obligation, and Craksheld is dead for thought.’
Will take the letter to Mr. William though it cost him fourteen days’
labor. Was five weeks riding ‘to Canterbury, and again I will no longer
drive, for in winter I may not ride,’ etc.

  [From the reference to ‘the 14th year of this King,’ it is evident
  that this letter was written after 1474, the 14th year of Edward IV.
  It may, perhaps, be of the reign of Henry VII.; in which case it was
  addressed to the younger John Paston, who was then a knight, his
  brother being dead, about the year 1500.]

    [Footnote 244-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]

    [Footnote 244-2: Street-Hall or Straw Hall, in Great Cressingham,
    was one of the manors which belonged to Judge Paston. In 1451,
    Blomefield tells us that Walter Paston, clerk, gave it to his
    brother John. In the reign of Henry VIII. Sir William Paston sold
    it to Dame Elizabeth Fitzwilliams.--Blomefield, vi. 99.]


881

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[245-1]

[Sidenote: 1476 / JAN. 17]

Lyke it yow to weete, that not in the most happy season ffor me, it is
so ffortunyd, that wher as my Lorde off Norffolke, yisterdaye beying in
goode heele, thys nyght dyed abowte mydnyght, wherffor it is ffor alle
that lovyd hym to doo and helpe nowe that, that maye be to hys honoure,
and weell to hys sowele. And it is soo, that thys contre is nott weell
purveyd off clothe off golde ffor the coveryng ffor hys bodye and herse;
wherffor every man helpyng to hys power, I putte the cowncell off my
lorde in cowmffort, that I hoped to gete one ffor that daye, if it weer
so that it be nott broken, or putt to other use.

Wherffor please it yow to sende me worde iff it be so, that ye have, or
kan kom by the clothe off tyssywe that I bowte ffor our ffaders tombe,
and I undretake it shall be saffyd ageyn ffor yowe on hurt at my perell;
I deeme herby to gete greet thanke, and greet assystence in tyme to
come; and that owther Syme or Mother Brown maye deliver it me to morow
by vij. off the clokke.

Item, as ffor other means, I have sente my servaunt Richard Toring to
London, whyche I hope shall brynge me goode tydyngs ageyn, and with in
iiij. dayes I hope to see yowe.

Wretyn on Wednysdaye, xvij. daye off Janyver, anno E. iiij^ti xv^{o}.

  JOHN PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 245-1: [From Fenn, ii. 186.] This letter is not
    addressed, but must have been intended for the writer’s brother
    John, or else, as Fenn suggests, for his mother, Margaret. Sir
    John, however, ends by saying, ‘Within four days I hope to see
    you’; and it appears by next letter that he was actually with his
    brother at Norwich within _three_ days, whereas he paid no visit
    to his mother, who seems to have been living, as she had done for
    some time, at Mautby. This letter must have been written from
    Framlingham, whither Sir John had doubtless gone to petition the
    Duke of Norfolk about Caister.]


882

JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[246-1]

_To my ryght worchepful modyr, Margaret Paston._

[Sidenote: 1476 / JAN. 21]

Aftyr all dewtes of recomendacyon, pleasyt yow to weet that as yesterday
att noon my brodyr Sir John departyd fro Norwyche towardes London; for
as now all the sped is with the Kyng for the swerte of the maner of
Caster, consyderyng the dyeing seasyd of my Lord of Norffolk. He
trustyth to be in thys contre ayen with in x. or xij. dayes. And at hys
departyng he seyd to me that ye sent hym woord to selle the clothe of
gold, if he myght selle it well, whyche clothe I thynke may be sold, iff
ye wyll agre; not withstandyng I wylle make no bargayn for it, tyll ye
send me woord of the serteyn some what ye wyll have for it, or ellys ye
to have it ayen. Sir Robard Wyngfeld offyrd me yesterday xx. mark for
it, but I wot well ye shall have more for it, if ye wyll sell it; wher
for, as ye wyll deele in this mater, I prey yow send me woord to morew
be tymys, for if thys bargayn be forsakyn, I trow it wyll be longe er ye
kan get an other bargayn to selle it eny thyng aftyr that is woorthe.

Modyr, in as humbyll wyse as I can, I beseche yow of your blyssyng.
I trust fro hense foorthe that we shall have our chyldyr in rest with
ought rebwkyng for ther pleying wanton; for it is told me your ostass at
Freton hathe gotyn hyr syche a thyng to pley with, that our other
chyldyr shall have leve to sporte theym. God send hyr joye of it.

Wretyn at Norwyche, thys Sonday.

  Your sone and humbyll servaunt,

  JOHN PASTON.

    [Footnote 246-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter is shown by
    internal evidence to have been written shortly after the Duke of
    Norfolk’s death, which, as we have seen, took place on the 17th
    January 1476. It was written on a Sunday, and states that Sir John
    Paston had left Norwich the day before. The letter following,
    which is of the 23rd January, is dated by John Paston, ‘Tuesday
    next after your (Sir John’s) departing,’ so that the Sunday on
    which this was written must certainly have been the 21st.]


883

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[247-1]

_To Sir John Paston, Knyght, at the George, at Powlys Wharffe._

[Sidenote: 1476 / JAN. 23]

Aftyr all dewtes of recomendacyon, lyeketh yow to weet that I ensuer yow
your sendyng to Caster is evyll takyn among my lordes folkes, in so
myche that some sey that ye tendryd lytyll my lordes dethe, in as myche
as ye wold so sone entre upon hym aftyr hys dyssease, with ought avyse
and assent of my lordes consayll; wherfor it is thought here by syche as
be your frendes in my lordes house that if my lady have onys the graunt
of the wardshepp of the chyld,[247-2] that she wyll ocupye Caster with
other londes, and ley the defaute on your unkynd hastyness of entre with
ought hyr assent. Wherfor in eny wyse get yow a patent of the Kyng
ensealyd be for hyrs, and ye may by eny meane possybyll.

Also I prey yow comon with my Lord Chamberleyn for me, and weet hough
that he wyll have me demeanyd.

It iss told me for serteyn that ther is none hey to gete at Caleys;
wherfor if I mygh be pardond for eny kepyng of horse at Caleys till Myd
somer, it wer a good torne.

The berer herof shall come home ayen fro London with in a day aftyr that
he comyth thedyr, if ye wyll ought comand hym. I prey yow send me woord
by hym hough ye do with your maters, and I prey yow in eny wyse lete me
undyrstand, by the berer heroff, hough Bowen of the Cheker wyll dele
with me; vj^xx. and x_li._ it is nough, and I wold have vij^xx._li._ and
x_li._ and I to plege it ought in iiij. or v. yer, or ellys to forfet
the maner.

Wretyn at Norwyche, the Twysday next aftyr your departyng thens, xxiij.
die Januarii, anno E. iiij^ti xv^{o}.

  JOHN PASTON.

    [Footnote 247-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]

    [Footnote 247-2: This child was Ann, who soon after was betrothed
    to Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York, the second son of King
    Edward. She died very young, and the Duke was, as it is supposed,
    smothered in the Tower by the command of his uncle Richard
    III.--F.]


884

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[248-1]

_To John Paston, Esquier, at Norwyche, be thys delyveryd._

[Sidenote: 1476 / JAN. 27]

I recomaunde me to yow, letyng yow weete that I was infformyd by Ric.
Radle, that on Scarlett, that was undrescheryff to Hastyngs,[248-2]
wolde sywe to me on yowr behalff, ffor that ye weer dyspleasyd with a
returne off Nichill[248-3] uppon yow in the seyde Hastyngs tyme;
wherffor Ric. Radle thoghte that the seyde Scarlett wolde be gladde to
gyff yow a noble or a riall ffor a sadell to amends, so that ye wolde
sease and stoppe the bylle, whyche ye entende to putt into the corte
ageyn hys Master Hastyngs.

Wherffor the seyde Scarlett com to me, and prayed me to helpe in the
same, and so I have don my devoir to ffeele off hym the most that he can
ffynde in hys stomake to depart with to please yow; and in conclusyon I
trowe, he shall gyff yow a doblett clothe off sylke, price xx_s._ or
therabout; whyche uppon suche answeer as I heer ffrom yowe, I deme that
Bysshop the atornye shall, iff I conclude with hym on yowr behalve, paye
in mony or otherwyse, to whom that ye woll assynge heer.

I shall by the means of Raddele weet at whoys sywte it was takyn owte;
I deme it som thynge doon by craffte, by the means off them that have
entresse in your lond, to th’entent to noyse itt therys, or to make yow
past shame off the sellyng theroff.

Item, I have receyvyd a letter ffrom yowe wretyn on Tywesdaye last.

Item, wher that som towards my Lady of Norffolk noyse that I dyd
onkyndely to sende so hastely to Caster as I dyd; there is no dyscrete
person that so thynkyth, ffor iff my lorde hade ben as kynde to me as he
myght have ben, and acordyng to suche hert and servyce as my
grauntffadr, my ffadr, yowr selff, and I, have owght and doon to my
Lords of Norffolk that ded ben, and yitt iff I hadde weddyd hys dowghtr,
yitt most I have doon as I dydde.

And moor ovyr, iff I had hadde any demyng off my lordys dethe iiij.
howrs or he dyed, I most neds, but iff I wolde be knowyn a ffoole, have
entryd it the howr byffor hys dycesse; but in effecte, theygh that in
that mater have alweys ment onkyndely to me, they ffeyne that rumor
ageyn me; but ther is noon that ment truly to hym that dede is, that
wolde be sory that I hadde itt, and in especiall suche as love hys
sowle.

Item, wher it is demyd that my lady wolde herafftr be the rather myn
hevy lady ffor that delyng, I thynke that she is to resonable so to be,
ffor I did it nott onwyst to hyr cowncell; there was no man thoght that
I sholde doo otherwysse; an as to seye, that I myght have hadde my
ladyes advyce or lyve [_leave_], I myght have teryed yitt, or I cowde
have speken with hyr, or yitt have hadde any body to have mevyd hyr
there on my behalve, as ye wote I dydde what I cowde. Moreovyr I taryed
by the advyce off Sir Robert Wyngffelde iij. dayes there, ffor that he
putte me in comffirt that the Lord Howard,[249-1] and hys brother Sir
John, sholde have comen to Norwyche, att whoys comyng he dowtyd nott but
that I sholde have a goode dyrection takyn ffor me in that mater, they
leyhe to me onkyndenesse ffor ovyrkyndenesse.

Item, as ffor my mater heer, itt was thys daye beffoor alle the lordes
off the cowncelle, and amonge them all, it was nott thowght, that in my
sendyng off Whetley thyddr, in mediately afftr the dycesse off the Duke,
that I dalt onkyndly or onfyttyngly, but that I was moor onresonably
dalte with; wherffor, late men deme what they wylle, grettest clerkys
are nott alweye wysest men; but I hope hastely to have on weye in it or
other.

Item, I wende [_expected_] to have ffownde a gowne off myn heer, but it
come home the same daye that I come owte, browght by Herry Berker, loder
[_carrier_]. I wolde in alle hast possible have that same gowne off puke
ffurryd with whyght lambe.

Item, I wolde have my longe russett gowne off the Frenshe russett in
alle hast, ffor I have no gowne to goo in here.

Item, I praye yow recomande me to my moodr, and lat us alle prey God
sende my Lady off Norffolk a soone, for uppon that restythe moche mater;
ffor if the Kyngys soone[250-1] mary my lords dowghtr, the Kynge wolde
that hys soone sholde have a ffayr place in Norffolk, thowhe he sholde
gyffe me ij. tymes the valywe in other londe, as I am doon to weete.
I praye yow sende me worde off my ladyes spede as soone as ye kan.

Item, as ffor Bowen I shall ffele hym, and sholde have doon, thowghe ye
hadde nott sente.

Item, ther is offryd me a goode marriage for my suster Anne Skypwithys
sone and heyr off Lynkolneshyre, a man v. or vj. mrke by year. No mor.

Wretyn at London, the xxvij. daye off Janyver, anno E. iiij^ti xv^{o}.

Item, my Lady off Excester[250-2] is ded, and it was seyde that bothe
the olde Dywchesse off Norffolk,[251-1] and the Cowntesse off
Oxenfforde[251-2] weer ded, but it is nott soo yitt.

Item, I shall remembr Caleyse bothe for horse and alle, &c.

    [Footnote 248-1: [From Fenn, ii. 190.]]

    [Footnote 248-2: John Hastyngs was Sheriff of Norfolk the
    preceding year.--F.]

    [Footnote 248-3: Nihils, or Nichils, are issues which the sheriff
    that is apposed in the Exchequer says are _nothing worth_ and
    illeviable, through the insufficiency of the parties from whom
    due.--F.]

    [Footnote 249-1: Afterwards Duke of Norfolk.--F.]

    [Footnote 250-1: Richard, Duke of York, second son of King Edward
    IV., in or before January 1478, married Anne, sole daughter and
    heir of John Mowbray, late Duke of Norfolk.--_Rolls of
    Parliament_, vi. 168. She was at that time only in her sixth year,
    and she died early.]

    [Footnote 250-2: Anne, daughter of Richard, Duke of York, sister
    of Edward IV., and widow of Henry Holland, the last Duke of
    Exeter, her first husband; she died 14th of January 1475, and lies
    buried with Sir Thomas Saint Leger, Knight, her second husband, in
    a private chapel at Windsor.--F.]

    [Footnote 251-1: Ellenor, only daughter of William Bourchier, Earl
    of Ewe, in Normandy, and widow of John Mowbray, Duke of
    Norfolk.--F.]

    [Footnote 251-2: Margaret, daughter of Richard Nevile, Earl of
    Salisbury, and wife of John de Vere, Earl of Oxford, now a
    prisoner in the Castle of Hammes, in Picardy; or it may refer to
    Elizabeth, widow of the late Earl of Oxford, and daughter and heir
    of Sir John Howard, Knight.--F.]


885

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[251-3]

_To Sir John Paston, Knyght, at the George, by Powlys Wharf, in London._

[Sidenote: 1476 / FEB. 3]

Aftyr all dwtes of recomendacyon, lyeketh yow to wete, that with in thys
owyr past, I receyd your letter wretyn the xxvij. day of Januar, by
whyche I undyrstand that Scarlet wold have an end with me; but lesse
then xl_s._ is to lytyll, for iff I wold do the uttermost to hym,
I shold recover by the statwte, I trow xl_li._ or more, but lesse then
xxxiij_s._ iiij_d._ I wyll in no wyse; and ye may sey that ye of your
owne hed wyll geve hym the ode nobyll of xl_s._, and if ye have the v.
noblys I prey yow let Parker of Flett stret have therof xxx_s._ and lete
Pytte and Rychard and Edward drynk the xl_d._ As for your gownys, they
shalbe sent yow in as hasty wyse as is possybyll. Thys must be
consayll:--It is promysyd my lady by my Lord Chamberleyn that the _diem
clausit extremum_ for my lord shall not be delyverd tyll she be of power
to labore hyr sylff her most avauntage in that mater, wherfor ye ned not
to dele over largely with thexchetoures. Also consayll:--Robard Brandon
and Colevyle have by meanys enformyd my lady that ye wold have gotyn
Caster fro hyr by stronge hand, now thys frost whyll the mote is frosyn,
in so myche that she was porposed to have sent thedyr R. Brandon and
other to have kept the place tyll syche tyme as she made axe me the
questyon whedyr ye entendet that wey or not, and I avysed hyr that she
shold rather sofyr R. Brandon and hys retenew to lye in Norwyche of hys
owne cost then to lye at the taverne at Yermouthe on hyr cost, for I
lete hyr have knowlage that ye never entendyd non entre in to that
place, but by hyr assent and knowlage I wast well. Syr, for Godes sake,
in as hasty wyse as is possybyll, send me woord how ye feele my Lord
Chamberleyn and Bowen dysposed to me wardes, for I shall never be in
hertes ease tyll I undyrstand ther tweys dysposysyon. Also, I prey yow,
let Symond Dame have knowlage as soone as ye have red thys lettyr that I
wold in eny wyse that he swe forthe the axions a yenst Darby and other
for Byskley, notwithstandyng the bylle that I sent hym to the contrary
by Edmund Jeney, for Darby and I are brokyn of, of our entrete whyche
was apoyntyd at Thettford. God sped yow in thes maters, and in all
other. Ye send me woord of a good maryage for my syster Anne. I prey yow
aspye some old thryffty draff wyff in London for me. Thomas Brampton at
the Blak Fryers in London wyth syche other as he and I apoyntyd wyll
helpe yow to aspye on for me on ther part. I prey yow that I may be
recomandyd to hym, and prey hym that he wyll, in as hasty wyse as he
can, comforte me with on letter fro hym, and fro the other persone that
he and I comond of, and I prey yow as ye se hym at the parvyse[252-1]
and ellys where, calle on hym for the same letter and telle hym that ye
most nedys have on to me, and when ye have it breke it and ye lyst or ye
send it me.

  _Endorsed_--iij. Februarij, anno xv^{o}.

    [Footnote 251-3: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]

    [Footnote 252-1: The church porch. In London it commonly meant the
    portico of St. Paul’s Cathedral, which is doubtless the place here
    intended.]

  [[ye ned not to dele over largely
  _“e” in “over” invisible_]]


886

JOHN PASTON TO LORD HASTINGS[253-1]

_To my Lord._

[Sidenote: 1476 / MARCH 2]

My most doughtyd and singular good lord, aftyr most humble and dew
recomendacyon, please it your good lordshepp to have knowlage that,
accordyng to your comandement, in my wey homeward, I remembred me of a
persone whyche to my thynkyng is meetly to be clerk of your kechyn,
whyche persone is now in servyse with Master Fitzwater, and was befor
that with Whethyll at Gwynes, and purveyor for hys house, and at syche
tyme as the Kynges grace was ther last in hys vyage towardes France.
Thys man is meane of stature, yonge inough, well wittyd, well manerd, a
goodly yong man on horse and foote. He is well spokyn in Inglyshe, metly
well in Frenshe, and verry perfite in Flemyshe. He can wryght and reed.
Hys name is Rychard Stratton; hys modyr is Mastress Grame of Caleys. And
when I had shewyd hym myn intent, he was agreable and verry glad if that
it myght please your lordshepp to accept hym in to your servyse; wherto
I promysed hym my poore helpe, as ferforthe as I durst meve your good
lordshepp for hym, trustyng that I shold have knowelage of your plesure
her in, or I departed towardes your lordshep ought of this contrey.
Wherfor I advysed hym to be redy with in xiiij. dayes of Marche at the
ferthest, that if it pleasyd your lordsheppe to accept hym or to have a
syght of hym be for your departyng to Caleys, that ther shold be no
slaughthe in hym.

He desyred me to meve Master Fitzwater to be good mastyr to hym in thys
behalve, and so I dyd; and he was verry glad and agreable ther to,
seying if hys sone had ben of age, and all the servauntis he hathe myght
be in eny wyse acceptabell to your lordshepp, that they all, and hym
silff in lyek wyse, shall be at your comandment, whyll he leveth.

And at my comyng home to my poore house, I sent for Robart Bernard, and
shewid on to hym that I had mevyd your lordshepp for hym; and he in lyek
forme is agreable to be redy by the xiiij. day of Marche to awayte on
your lordshepp, be it to Caleys or ellys where, and fro that day so
foorthe for ever, whyll hys lyff wyll last, with ought grugeing or
contraying your comandement and plesure, in eny wyse that is in hym
possibyll t’accomplishe.

I shewed on to hym that I had preyed Master Talbot to be a mean to your
good lordshepp for hym, and if so wer that Mastyr Talbot thought that
your lordshepp wer content to take hys servyse, then that it wold please
Mr. Talbot to meve my Lady of Norffolkes grace to wryght or send to
Bernard, puttyng hym in knowlage that hyr grace is content that he shall
become your menyall servaunt. Wherof he was passyng well pleasyd; but,
that notwithstandyng, as I enformed your lordshepp, he is not so
reteyned, neyther by fee nor promess, but that he may let hym sylff
loose to do your lordsheppe servyse when ye wyll receyve hym, and so
wyll he do; but, your lordshepe so pleasid, leve wer bettyr. Rychard
Stratton told me that whyll he was in servyse with Whethyll, John Redwe
mocyond hym onys myche aftyr thys intent, but at that tyme Whethyll wold
not be so good mastyr to hym as to meve your lordshepe for hym.

My lord, I trust that your lordshepe shall lyek bothe ther persones and
ther condicyons; and as for ther trowthes, if it may please your good
lordshepe to accept my poore woord with thers, I wyll depose largely for
that. And as it pleasyth your good lordshepe to comand me in thes
maters, and all other, if it may please your lordshepe to shewe the same
to my brodyr Nessfeld, he knowith who shall sonest be with me to putt me
in knowlage of your plesure, whyche I shall be at all seasons redy
t’accomplyshe to my poore power, with Godes grace, Whom I beseche longe
to contenue the prosperous astate of your good lordshepp.

Fro Norwyche, the seconde daye of Marche, with the hand of your most
humble servaunt and beedman,

  JOHN PASTON.

    [Footnote 253-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] Although the lord to
    whom this letter was addressed is not named, it was undoubtedly
    intended for Lord Hastings, Lieutenant of Calais, who, as will be
    seen hereafter, was preparing to go over to Calais in March
    1476.--_See_ No. 888.]


887

JOHN PASTON TO [MARGERY BREWS][255-1]

[Sidenote: 1476(?)]

Mastresse, thow so be that I, unaqweyntyd with yow as yet, tak up on me
to be thus bold as to wryght on to yow with ought your knowlage and
leve, yet, mastress, for syche pore servyse as I now in my mynd owe yow,
purposyng, ye not dyspleasyd, duryng my lyff to contenu the same,
I beseche yow to pardon my boldness, and not to dysdeyn, but to accepte
thys sympyll byll to recomand me to yow in syche wyse as I best can or
may imagyn to your most plesure. And, mastress, for sych report as I
have herd of yow by many and dyverse persones, and specyally by my ryght
trusty frend, Rychard Stratton, berer her of, to whom I beseche yow to
geve credence in syche maters as he shall on my behalve comon with yow
of, if it lyke you to lystyn hym, and that report causythe me to be the
more bold to wryght on to yow, so as I do; for I have herd oft tymys
Rychard Stratton sey that ye can and wyll take every thyng well that is
well ment, whom I beleve and trust as myche as fewe men leveing,
I ensuer yow by my trowthe. And, mastress, I beseche yow to thynk non
other wyse in me but that I wyll and shall at all seasons be redy wythe
Godes grace to accomplyshe all syche thynges as I have enformyd and
desyerd the seyd Rychard on my behalve to geve yow knowlage of, but if
[_unless_] it so be that a geyn my wyll it come of yow that I be cast
off fro yowr servyse and not wyllyngly by my desert, and that I am and
wylbe yours and at your comandmen in every wyse dwryng my lyff. Her I
send yow thys bylle wretyn with my lewd hand and sealyd with my sygnet
to remayn with yow for a wyttnesse ayenste me, and to my shame and
dyshonour if I contrary it. And, mastress, I beseche yow, in easyng of
the poore hert that somtyme was at my rewle, whyche now is at yours,
that in as short tyme as can be that I may have knowlage of your entent
and hough ye wyll have me demeanyd in thys mater, and I wylbe at all
seasons redy to performe in thys mater and all others your plesure, as
ferforth as lythe in my poore power to do or in all thers that ought
wyll do for me, with Godes grace, Whom I beseche to send yow the
accomplyshement of your most worchepfull desyers, myn owne fayer lady,
for I wyll no ferther labore but to yow, on to the tyme ye geve me leve,
and tyll I be suer that ye shall take no dysplesur with my ferther
labore.

    [Footnote 255-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter is printed
    from a draft in the hand of John Paston the younger. I suppose it
    must have been written about the year 1476, and intended for
    Margery Brews, whom he afterwards married. It will be seen that
    Richard Stratton, whom in his last letter he recommended to Lord
    Hastings, is here the bearer of a confidential message to the
    lady.]


888

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[256-1]

_To John Paston, Esquier, or to Mestresse Margrett Paston, hys moodre,
in Norfolk._

[Sidenote: 1476 / MARCH 12]

I recomande me to yow, letyng yow wete that, blessyd be God, uppon
Saterdaye last past my lorde[256-2] and wee toke the see, and come to
Caleyes the same daye, and as thys daye my lorde come to Guynesse, and
theer was receyvyd honourablye with owt any obstaklys; wheer as I fownde
Master Fytzwalter and othre, whyche wer ryght hevye for the dethe of the
noble man thatt was theer to foor, itt happyd soo that my seyd Master
Fytzwalter axid me ryght hertely for yow, and I lete hym weete that I
demyd ye wolde be heer in haste, wheroffe he seyde he was ryght soory,
for soo moche that he entendyth to come in to Englonde, and as I
conceyve he wyll come to Attylborogh, and brynge my mestresse hys wyffe
with hym, and theer to stablysshe hys howse contynuall. Wherffor he
thynketh that he sholde have as grete a lakke off yow as off any one man
in that contre, willyng me to wryght on to yowe, and to late yow weete
off hys comynge. He also hathe tolde me moche off hys stomake and tendre
faver that he owythe to yow; wherffor I asserteyn yow that he is your
verry especiall goode master, and iffe ye weer abydynge in thatt contre,
whylse he weer theer, he is dysposyd to doo largely for yowe in dyverse
wyse, whyche weer to longe to wryght, in so moche that I feele by hym
that he thynkyth that itt sholde be longe er he scholde be wery of yowr
expences of horse or man. Now I remytte alle thynge to your dyscresion;
ye woote best what is for yow.

As for my lorde, I undrestande nott yitt whethyr he wylle in to
Ingelonde the weke to foor Esterne, or ellys aftre.

I pray yow recomande me to my moodre. I wolde have wretyn to hyr, but in
trowthe I ame somewhatt crased, what with the see and what wythe thys
dyet heer.

No moor to yow, but wretyn at Gynes, the xij. daye off Marche, anno E.
xvj.

  By JOHN PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 256-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]

    [Footnote 256-2: Hastings.]


889

SIR JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[257-1]

_To Mestresse Margrete Paston, at Norwyche, or hyr sone, John Paston,
Esquyer, and to everych off them._

[Sidenote: 1476 / MARCH 21]

I recomande me to yowe. Like it yow to weete that I am nott sertayne
yitt whether my lorde[257-2] and I shall come into Ingelonde the weke
byffoor Est[er]ne, or ellys the weke afftr Est[er]ne; wherffor, moodr,
I beseche yow to take noo dysplesyr with me ffor my longe tarynge, ffor
I most doo noon otherwyse ffor dysplesyng off my lorde. I was noo thynge
gladde off thys jornaye, iff I myght goodely have chosen; neverthelesse,
savyng that ye have cawse to be dyspleasyd with me ffor the mater off
Kokett, I am ellys ryght gladde, ffor I hope that I ame fferre moor in
ffavor with my lorde then I was to ffoor.

Item, I sende yow, brother John, a letter herwith, whyche was browte
hyddr to Caleys, ffrom the George at Powles Wharff; I deme it comethe
ffrom my brother Water.

Item, iff ye entende hyddrewarde, itt weer weell doon that ye hygthed
yowe, ffor I suppose that my lorde wille take the vywe off alle hys
retynywe heer, nowe byffoor hys departyng; and I thynke that he woolde
be better contente with yowr comyng nowe, than an other tyme; doo as ye
thynke best, and as ye maye.

Item, wher Master Fytzwalter made me to wryght to yowe to advyse yow to
tarye, I remytte thatt to yowr dyscretion.

As ffor tydyngs heer, we her ffrom alle the worlde; ffyrst, the Lorde
Ryverse was at Roome right weell and honorably, and other Lords off
Ynglonde, as the Lord Hurmonde,[258-1] and the Lord Scrope,[258-2] and
at ther departyng xij. myle on thyse-halff Roome, the Lorde Ryverse was
robbyd off alle hys jowelles and plate, whyche was worthe m^le. marke or
better, and is retornyd to Rome ffor a remedy.

Item, the Duke of Burgoyne hath conqueryd Loreyn, and Quene Margreet
shall nott nowe be lykelyhod have it; wherffor the Frenshe Kynge
cheryssheth hyr butt easelye; but afftr thys conquest off Loreyn, the
Duke toke grete corage to goo uppon the londe off the Swechys [_Swiss_]
to conquer them, butt the [_they_] berded hym att an onsett place, and
hathe dystrussyd hym, and hathe slayne the most parte off hys vanwarde,
and wonne all hys ordynaunce and artylrye, and mor ovyr all stuffe thatt
he hade in hys ost with hym; exceppte men and horse ffledde nott, but
they roode that nyght xx. myle; and so the ryche saletts,[258-3]
heulmetts, garters, nowchys[258-4] gelt, and alle is goone, with tents,
pavylons, and alle, and soo men deme hys pryde is abatyd. Men tolde hym
that they weer ffrowarde karlys, butte he wolde nott beleve it, and yitt
men seye, that he woll to them ageyn. Gode spede them bothe.

Item, Sir John Mydelton toke leve off the Duke to sporte hym, but he is
sett in pryson att Brussellys.

I praye yowe sende me som worde iff ye thynke likly that I may entr
Caster when I woll, by the next messenger.

Wretyn at Caleys, in resonable helthe off bodye and sowle, I thanke
Good, the xxj. daye off Marche, anno E. iiij^ti xvj^{o}.

  J. P., K.

    [Footnote 257-1: [From Fenn, ii. 198.]]

    [Footnote 257-2: Hastings.]

    [Footnote 258-1: John, sixth Earl of Ormond.]

    [Footnote 258-2: John, Lord Scrope of Bolton.]

    [Footnote 258-3: Light head-pieces.--F.]

    [Footnote 258-4: Embossed ornaments, chains, buckles, etc.--F.]

  [[departyng xij. myle on thyse-halff Roome
  _printed with ambiguous hyphen at line break_]]


890

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[259-1]

_To the ryght worchepfull Sir John Paston, Knyght, lodgyd at the George,
by Powlys Wharf, in London._

[Sidenote: 1476 / MAY 6]

Aftyr all dewtes of recomendacyon, lyeketh yow to wet, that to my power
ye be welcom ayen in to Inglond. And as for the Castell of Shene, ther
is no mor in it but Colle and hys mak, and a goose may get it; but in no
wyse I wold not that wey, and my modyr thynkyth the same. Take not that
wey, if ther be eny other.

I undyrstand that Mastres Fytzwater hathe a syster, a mayd, to mary.
I trow, and ye entretyd hym, she myght come into Crysten menys handys.
I prey yow spek with Mastyr Fytzwater of that mater for me, and ye may
telle hym, synse that he wyll have my servyse, it wer as good, and syche
a bargayn myght be mad, that bothe she and I awaytyd on hym and my
mastress hys wyff at oure owne cost, as I a lone to awayt on hym at hys
cost; for then he shold be swer that I shold not be flyttyng, and I had
syche a qwarell to kepe me at home. And I have hys good wylle, it is non
inpossybyll to bryng a bowght.

I thynk to be at London with in a xiiij. dayes at the ferthest, and
peraventure my mastress also, in consayll be it clatryd. God kepe yow
and yours.

At Norwyche, the vj. day of May, anno E. iiij^ti xvj^{o}.

  J. P.

    [Footnote 259-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]


891

SIR JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[260-1]

_To Mestresse Margret Paston, in Norwyche, or to hyr sone John Paston,
Knyght._

[Sidenote: 1476 / MAY 27]

Please it yow to weete that as for my materes, and theye appeyre
nott,[260-2] the doo, blessyd be Godde, as weell as I wolde they dyd,
saffe that it shalle cost me grett mony, and it hathe cost me moche
laboor. It is soo that the Kynge most have C. marke, and other costes
will drawe xl. marke. And my mater is examynyd by the Kynges Cowncell,
and declaryd affoor alle the Lordes, and now lakkythe noo thynge but
[the Pry]vy Seals, and wryghtyng to Master Colv[ill][260-3] to avoide;
for the[260-3] [Kyng hath p]romysed me as moche as I wolde he sholde
fullefille, and alle the Lordes, Juges, Serjauntes, have affermyd my
title goode. Nott withstandyng Sowthewell, James Hubberde, and Sir W.
Braundon, where at ther owne desyrs, offryd to afferme and advowe my
tytell for goode, and that my Lorde off Norffolk that ded is had noo
tytell, thatt they knywe, they tolde my tale as ille as they cowde, and
yitt a lye or too to helpe it, and yit it servyth them nott, they be
knowen as they ar (in Cowncell be it seyde, and so most all thys letter
be).

I have moche payne to gete so moche mony. Neverthelesse, but iff myne
oncle schewe hym selfe werse than ever he was, I shalle nott fayle, if
he kepe me promyse, and thatt is but as he dyde last, that is butt to be
my sywerte, and I to make hym sywerte ageyn.

The Kynge departythe thys daye, and wille nott be heer tyll Frydaye,
whyche lettyth me, or ellys by thatt daye I wolde have hopyd to have
comen homeward, and erst per aventure. No moor, but Jesus have yow in
kepyng.

Wretyn at London, the xxvj. daye of Maye, the Mondaye next Holy
Thurrysdaye, the Assencion.

   *   *   *

The Kynge wold have bowte it, but he was enfformyd off the trowthe, and
that it was nott for a prynce, and off the greet pryse that I wolde
selle it att; for that I myght nott for bere it, for he scholde have
payed m^{l.}m^l. marke or moor, iff he hadde hadde it.

  Your sone,

  J. PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 260-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter relates to
    Sir John Paston’s claim to Caister after the Duke of Norfolk’s
    death, which claim he succeeded in establishing in June 1476, as
    appears by the letter following. The date 26th May at the end of
    the letter is an error. The ‘Monday next Holy Thursday’ was the
    27th.]

    [Footnote 260-2: _i.e._ if they do not get worse.]

    [Footnote 260-3: Paper decayed.]

  [[Salutation
  ... or to hyr sone John Paston, Knyght.
  _printed as shown: misreading of Fenn’s header?_
    To Mestresse Margret Paston,
      in Norwyche or to hyr Sone
      John Paston K^t]]


892

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[261-1]

_To John Paston, Esquier, beyng at the Syngne of the George, at Powles
Wharffe._

[Sidenote: 1476 / JUNE 30]

I recomaunde me to yow, letyng yow weete that I hav receyvyd yowr
letter, wretyn the next daye aftre Mydsomer; for answer wheroff I thynke
that to be bownde in v^c. [500] marke, I thynke it is to moche, where as
I felt by yow ye sholde have with the gentylwoman but iiij^c [400];
neverthelesse I agree. But ye shall undrestande that I wyll not be
bownde for yow that ye shall make hyr joyntour past xx_li._ by yer,
within a sertayne daye lymyted; be it j. yere or ij., that is the
largest that ye maye performe. For as for the maner of Sparham, my
moodre and ye acorde notte in yowr saynges; she wyll nowght graunte yow
ther in, whylse she levyth, saff, as she seythe to me, she hathe
grauntyd yow x. marke by yeer tyll xl_li._ be payed, that is but vj.
yeer; and aftre hyr dyscease she woll agree with goode will, so that it
maye be yowr proferment, that ye sholde have that maner in joynture with
yowr wyffe to the lenger lyver off yow bothe, payng x. marke by yeer,
soo or th . . . as she wyll that it shall be. Therfore, as for l. marke
joynture, I pray yow bynde me in no suche clawse, butt iff it be for
xx_li._ by a resonable daye, and xx. marke aftre the dyssease off my
moodre. Take example at Derby.

Item, ye make yow sywerer than I deme yow bee, for I deme that her
frendes wyll nott be content with Bedyngfeldes sywerte, nor yowres.
I deme thys mater will ocopy lenger leyser than ye deme for.

Item, I remembre thatt thys mony that she sholde have is nott redy, but
in the handes of marchauntes of the Estaple, whyche at a prove ye shall
fynde per case so slakke payeres, that ye myght be deseyvyd ther by.
I knowe dyverse have lost mony er they cowde gete ther dywtes owte off
the Staple. God spede yow, and sende yow that ye wolde have.

I sende yow the obligacion here with acordyng to yowr desyr, and a
letter to Bedyngfelde, thankyng hym for yow, and more over letyng hym
know of myn entent. Opyn it, and close it ageyn, if ye lyst.

Item, where I tolde yow that the gowne clothe off olde chamlott, I wolde
have it hoome for my suster Anne; ye for gate it. I praye yow sende it
home by the next massenger, and a letter with it of suche tydynges as ye
knowe.

Item, blissed be God, I have Castre at my will. God holde it better than
it doone her to foore.

No moore, but wretyn the next daye aftre Seynt Petre, anno E. iiij^ti
xvj^{o}.

  J. PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 261-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]


893

SIR JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[262-1]

_To Mestresse Margret Paston._

[Sidenote: 1476 / [AUG. 30]]

Please it yow to wete that I was uppon Tywesdaye, the daye that I
departyd froo yowe, with my brother John at Atelborow by viij. of the
clokke at evyn, and founde hym in suche case as iff ye had seyn hym than
ye wolde have be as gladde of hym osse off a nywe sone. I wenyd nott
that he sholde nott have levyd tyll the mornyng; in so moche that by my
trowthe I dare seye that iff it had nott fortunyd us to have comyn to
hym, he had not been on lyve on Wednysdaye. For syns Saterday slepyd he
nott iiij. howris, and yitt iij. of them was syns I come thydyr, on to
thys nyght; and thys nyght, blessyd be God, he hathe slepyd well, and
with Goddys grace I dowte not but thatt he shall do weell. For his agywe
is goone, and alle that laye in hys stomak and undre hys syde it weryth
aweye, and within a daye or ij. I hope he shall be so stronge that I
maye come frome hym; and he hopyth to see yowe with in fewe days affter,
as he seyth. On Wednysdaye I wysshed to hym that he and I hadde been at
Norwyche; wheruppon he harpyd all that nyght, and for cawe (_sic_) he
hadde not so goode rest as he wolde, it fylle in hys brayne to come to
Norwyche; and he in an angyr wolde nedys to horse. He wolde non horsse
litter, he was so stronge. Neverthelesse we wenyd nott that he sholde
have been able to have redyn a myle, and wenyd that it had nott been
possible to have passid Wyndham; bott whan he was uppe for that, we
seyde he roode so welle he ledde uss a dawnce faster than alle we cowde
weell folowe. He was at Wyndham, by my trowthe, in lesse than an howr by
a large quarter, and ther restyd hym an howre, and to horse ageyne and
was heer in lesse than an howr and one halffe. And now he dowteth nott
to slepe weell, for he seyth that he never ffaylyd to slepe weel in that
bedde that he hathe chosyn now at Frenshys, and thusse I hope he be
sauffe. And I am in dowte whethyr I shall within ij. dayes owther come
home to yow or ellis to goo forthe as ye woote off. No moore, &c. Wretyn
on Frydaye next the Decollacion of Seynt John Baptyst.

Item, I have the wrythynges off Richard Calle.

  Your sone,

  J. PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 262-1: [Add. MS. 34,889, f. 188.] Strangely enough there
    is no mention elsewhere of the serious illness of young John
    Paston mentioned in this letter, by which we might fix the year
    when it was written. But perhaps we may surmise that it was 1476,
    after he had been at Calais, where he was expected in the spring.
    The fact that he was ill at Attleborough agrees with this
    supposition, for that was the seat of the Fitzwalter family, and
    ‘Master Fitzwalter’ is mentioned in No. 888 as at Calais showing
    much interest in the Paston family. It may be observed also that
    in 1476, Friday ‘next’ the Decollation of St. John Baptist (29th
    August) would be the very next day.]


894

DAME ELIZABETH BREWS TO JOHN PASTON[264-1]

_To my wurschypfull cosyn, John Paston, be thys bill delyvered, &c._

[Sidenote: 1476 or 1477]

Ryght wurschypfull cosyn, I recommande me un to yowe, thankyng zowe
hertely for the grette chere that ze made me the last tyme that ze were
with me at Norwych, &c.

And, cosyn, as for the mater that was put in my nowncle Hastynges and
Henry Heydon, I ondyrstand be myn uncle, that ther was made non ende
therin, whech I am ryght sory for. Cosyn, ze be remembred what ze
promysed me that, and so were that myn uncle and Herry Heydon made none
ende therin, that ze wold put the mater in me; and if it please zowe so
for to do, in good faith, cosyn, I schall goo as wele and as ryghtfully
and consciensly as I can for both the partyes. And, cosyn, if it please
zowe to com to Topcroft, and poynt ze what dey when ze will com,
I schall sende for my cosyn to be ther the same day. And, cosyn, I pray
zowe to sende me worde agayn be the brynger of thys letter, howe ze will
do, &c.

And Almyghty Jesus hafe zowe in kepyng, &c.

  Be zour cosyn,

  Dame ELIZABETH BREWS.

    [Footnote 264-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This is the first of a
    series of letters, some of which were certainly written in
    February 1477, relating to the engagement of John Paston to
    Margery Brews. How early they began it is not easy to say
    precisely. On the back of this letter is written, apparently in
    the hand of John Paston, to whom it is addressed, ‘Letræ dominæ
    Elyzabethæ Brews et Margariæ filæ (_sic_) ejus.’]


895

DAME ELIZABETH BREWS TO JOHN PASTON[265-1]

_Un to my ryght wurschypffull cosyn, John Paston, be thys lettur
delyvered, &c._

Ryght wurschypfull cosyn, I recommande me un [to] yowe, &c. And I send
my husbonde a bill of the mater that ze knowe of, and he wrote an other
bill to me agayn towchyng the same mater; and he wold that ze schuld go
un to my maistresse yowr modur, and asaye if ze myght gete the hole
xx_li._ in to zowr handes, and then he wolde be more gladd to marye with
zowe, and will gyffe zowe an C_li._ And, cosyn, that day that sche is
maryed, my fadur will gyffe hyr l. merk. But and we acorde, I schall
gyffe yowe a grettere tresur, that is, a wytty gentylwoman, and if I sey
it, bothe good and vertuos; for if I schuld take money for hyr, I wold
not gyffe hyr for a m_li._ But, cosyn, I trust zowe so meche that I wold
thynke her wele besett on zowe, and ze were worthe meche more. And,
cosyn, a lytyll after that ze were gone, come a man fro my cosyn Derby,
and broght me wurde that suche a chance fell that he myght not come at
the day that was set, as I schall let zowe undyrstond more pleynly, when
I speke with zowe, &c. But, cosyn, and it wold please zowe to come agayn
what dey that ze will set, I dare undyrtake that they schall kepe the
same daye; for I wold be glad that, and myn husbond and ze myght acorde
in thys maryage, that it myght be my fortune to make and ende in thys
mater betwene my cosyns and zowe, that yche of zowe myght love other in
frendely wyse, &c. And, cosyn, if thys byll please not zowr entent,
I pray zowe that it may be brent, &c.

No more unto yowe at thys tyme, but Almyghty Jesus preserve zowe, &c.

  By zowr cosyn,

  Dame ELIZABETH BREWS.

    [Footnote 265-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] _See_ preliminary note
    to last letter.]


896

DAME ELIZABETH BREWS TO JOHN PASTON[266-1]

_To my wurschypfull cosyne, John Paston, be this bill delyveryd, &c._

[Sidenote: 1477 / FEB.]

Cosyn, I recomande me un to yowe, thankyng yowe hertely for the grette
chere that ye made me and all my folkys, the last tyme that I was at
Norwych; and ye promysyd me, that ye wold never breke the mater to
Margery unto suche tyme as ye and I were at a point. But ye hafe made
hyr suche advokett for yowe, that I may never hafe rest nyght ner day,
for callyng and cryeng uppon to brynge the saide mater to effecte, &c.

And, cosyn, uppon Fryday is Sent Volentynes Day, and every brydde
chesyth hym a make [_mate_]; and yf it lyke yowe to come one Thursday at
nyght, and so purvey yowe, that ye may abyde there tyll Monday, I trusty
to God, that ye schall so speke to myn husband; and I schall prey that
we schall bryng the mater to a conclusyon, &c. For, cosyn,

  It is but a sympill oke,
  That [is] cut down at the first stroke.

For ye will be resonabill, I trust to God, Whech hafe yowe ever in Hys
mercyfull kepyng, &c.

  Be yowr cosyn, Dame ELIZABETH BREWS,
  otherwes schall be called be Godds grace.

    [Footnote 266-1: [From Fenn, ii. 208.] It is clear from internal
    evidence that this letter was written between the 7th and the 12th
    of February, and the fact that St. Valentine’s Day (the 14th) fell
    on Friday, proves the year to have been 1477. Besides which, we
    have distinct references to the matter further on in the dated
    correspondence.]


897

MARGERY BREWS TO JOHN PASTON[267-1]

_Unto my ryght welebelovyd Voluntyn, John Paston, Squyer, be this bill
delyvered, &c._

[Sidenote: 1477 / FEB.]

Ryght reverent and wurschypfull, and my ryght welebeloved Voluntyne,
I recomande me unto yowe, ffull hertely desyring to here of yowr
welefare, whech I beseche Almyghty God long for to preserve un to Hys
plesur, and yowr herts desyre. And yf it please yowe to here of my
welefar, I am not in good heele of body, nor of herte, nor schall be
tyll I her ffrom yowe;

  For there wottys no creature what peyn that I endure,
  And for to be deede, I dare it not dyscure [_discover_].

And my lady my moder hath labored the mater to my ffadur full
delygently, but sche can no mor gete then ye knowe of, for the whech God
knowyth I am full sory. But yf that ye loffe me, as I tryste verely that
ye do, ye will not leffe me therefor; for if that ye hade not halfe the
lyvelode that ye hafe, for to do the grettest labur that any woman on
lyve myght, I wold not forsake yowe.

  And yf ye commande me to kepe me true wherever I go,
  I wyse I will do all my myght yowe to love and never no mo.
    And yf my freends say, that I do amys,
      Thei schal not me let so for to do,
    Myne herte me bydds ever more to love yowe
      Truly over all erthely thing,
    And yf thei be never so wroth,
    I tryst it schall be better in tyme commyng.

No more to yowe at this tyme, but the Holy Trinite hafe yowe in kepyng.
And I besech yowe that this bill be not seyn of none erthely creatur
safe only your selffe, &c.

And thys letter was indyte at Topcroft, with full hevy herte, &c.

  By your own,

  MARGERY BREWS.

    [Footnote 267-1: [From Fenn, ii. 210.]]


898

MARGERY BREWS TO JOHN PASTON[268-1]

_To my ryght welebelovyd cosyn, John Paston, Swyer, be this letter
delyveryd, &c._

[Sidenote: 1477 / FEB.]

Ryght wurschypfull and welebelovyd Volentyne, in my moste umble wyse,
I recommande me un to yowe, &c. And hertely I thanke yowe for the lettur
whech that ye sende me be John Bekarton, wherby I undyrstonde and knowe,
that ye be purposyd to come to Topcroft in schorte tyme, and withowte
any erand or mater, but only to hafe a conclusyon of the mater betwyx my
fader and yowe; I wolde be most glad of any creatur on lyve, so that the
mater myght growe to effect. And ther as ye say, and ye come and fynde
the mater no more towards you then ye dyd afortyme, ye wold no more put
my fader and my lady my moder to no cost ner besenesse, for that cause,
a good wyle aftur, wech causyth myne herte to be full hevy; and yf that
ye come, and the mater take to none effecte, then schuld I be meche mor
sory and full of hevynesse.

And as for my selfe, I hafe done and undyrstond in the mater that I can
or may, as Good knowyth; and I let yowe pleynly undyrstond, that my
fader wyll no mor money parte with all in that behalfe, but an C_li._
and l. marke, whech is ryght far fro the acomplyshment of yowr desyre.

Wherfore, yf that ye cowde be content with that good, and my por
persone, I wold be the meryest mayden on grounde; and yf ye thynke not
yowr selffe so satysfyed, or that ye myght hafe mech mor good, as I hafe
undyrstonde be yowe afor; good, trewe, and lovyng volentyne, that ye
take no such labur uppon yowe, as to come more for that mater, but let
is [_it ?_] passe, and never more to be spokyn of, as I may be yowr
trewe lover and bedewoman duryng my lyfe.

No more un to yowe at thys tyme, but Almyghty Jesus preserve yowe, bothe
body and sowle, &c.

  Be your Voluntyne,

  MARGERY BREWS.

    [Footnote 268-1: [From Fenn, ii. 214.]]


899

THOMAS KELA TO JOHN PASTON[269-1]

_Un to my ryght wurschypfull maister, John Paston, Swhyer, be this bill
delivered, &c._

[Sidenote: 1477 / FEB.]

Ryght wurschypfull sir, I recomande me un to yowe, lettyng yowe knowe,
as for the yonge gentylwoman, sche owyth yowe hyr good herte and love,
as I knowe be the comynicacion that I hafe hade with hyr for the same.

And, sir, ye knowe what my maister and my lady hath profered with hyr
CC. merke. And I dar sey, that hyr chambr and areyment schall be worthe
C. merk. And I harde my lady sey, that and the case required, both ye
and sche schuld hafe yowr borde with my lady iij. yer aftr.

And I understand by my lady, that sche wold that ye schuld labur the
mater to my maister, for it schuld be the bettr.

And I harde my lady sey,

  That it was a febill oke,
  That was kit down at the first stroke.

And ye be beholdyng un to my lady for hyr good wurde, for sche hath
never preysyd yowe to mech.

Sir, lyke as I promysyd yowe, I am yowr man, and my good will ye schall
hafe in worde and dede, &c.

And Jesus hafe yowe in Hys mercyfull kepyng, &c.

  Be yor man,

  THOMAS KELA.

    [Footnote 269-1: [From Fenn, ii. 216.]]


900

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[270-1]

_To John Paston, Esquyer, at Norwyche, in hast._

[Sidenote: 1477 / FEB. 14]

I recomaunde me to yow, letyng yow weete, that yisterdaye beganne the
grete cowncell, to whyche alle the astats off the londe shall com to,
butt if it be ffor gret and reasonable excusis; and I suppose the cheffe
cawse off thys assemble is, to comon what is best to doo, now uppon the
greet change by the dethe off the Duke of Burgoyne, and ffor the kepyng
off Caleys and the Marchys, and ffor the preservacion off the amyteys
taken late, as weell with Fraunce as now with the Membrys off Flaundres;
wher to I dowt nott ther shall be in all hast bothe the Duks off
Clarance and Glowcestre, wheroff I wolde that my brother E.[270-2] wyst.

Item, I ffeele butt litell effecte in the labor off W. Alyngton;
neverthelesse I deme it is nott for yow. She shall not passe CC. mark,
as fferr as I can undrestand aparte.

Item, I will nott fforget yow otherwyse.

Itt is so that thys daye I heer grett liklyhood, that my Lorde Hastyngs
shall hastely goo to Caleys with greet company; iff I thynke it be for
yow to be on [_one_], I shall nott fforgeet yow.

Item, thys daye the mater by twyen Mestresse Anne Haulte and me hathe
been soor broken bothe to the Cardinall,[270-3] to my Lorde
Chamberleyn,[270-4] and to my selffe, and I am in goode hope. When I
heer and knowe moor, I shall sende yow worde.

It semythe that the worlde is alle qwaveryng; it will reboyle somwher,
so that I deme yonge men shall be cherysshyd; take yowr hert to yow.
I ffeer that I can nott be excusyd, but that I shall fforthe with my
Lorde Hastyngs ovyr the see, but I shall sende yow worde in hast, and
iff I goo, I hope nott to tary longe.

Item, to my brother Edmond. I am like to speke to Mestresse Dyxon in
hast, and som deme that ther shall be condyssendyd, that iff E. P. come
to London that hys costs shall be payed ffor.

I shall hastely sende yow worde off moor thyngs.

Wretyn at London, the xiiij. day off Feverer, anno E. iiij^ti xvj. the
Fryday a for Fastyngong.

  JOHN PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 270-1: [From Fenn, ii. 204.]]

    [Footnote 270-2: Edmund Paston, who was in the garrison of
    Calais.]

    [Footnote 270-3: Thomas Bourchier, Archbishop of Canterbury.--F.]

    [Footnote 270-4: William, Lord Hastyngs.--F.]


901

JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[271-1]

_To my ryght worchepfull modyr, Margaret Paston._

[Sidenote: 1477 / MARCH 8]

Ryght worschepfull modyr, aftyr all dwtes of recommendacyon, in as
humble wyse as I can, I beseche yow of your dayly blyssyng. Modyr,
please yt yow to wett, that the cause that Dame Elizabeth Brews desyreth
to mete with yow at Norwyche, and not at Langley, as I apoyntyd with yow
at my last being at Mawtby, is by my meanys, for my brodyr Thomas
Jermyn, whyche knowyth nought of the mate [_match_], telyth me, that the
causey or ye can comme to Bokenham Fery is so over flowyn that ther is
no man that may on ethe passe it, though he be ryght well horsyd; whyche
is no mete wey for yow to passe over, God defend it. But, all thyngs
rekynyd, it shalbe lesse cost to yow to be at Norwyche, as for a day or
tweyn, and passe not, then to mete at Langly, wher every thyng is dere;
and your horse may be sent home ayen the same Wednysday.

Modyr, I beseche yow for dyvers causys, that my syster Anne may come
with yow to Norwyche; modyr, the mater is in a resonable good wey, and I
trust with Gods mercy, and with your good help, that it shall take
effect bettyr to myn avauntage then I told yow of at Mawtby; for I trow
ther is not a kynder woman leveing then I shall have to my modyr in
lawe, if the mater take, nor yet a kynder fadyr in lawe then I shall
have, though be he hard to me as yett. All the cyrcumstancys of the
mater, whyche I trust to tell yow at your comyng to Norwyche, cowd not
be wretyn in iij. levys of paper, and ye know my lewd hed well i nough,
I may not wryght longe, wherffor I ffery over all thyngs tyll I may
awayte on yow my selff. I shall do tonnen[272-1] in to your place a
doseyn ale, and bred acordyng, ayenst Wednysday. If Syme myght be
forborn it wer well done, that he war at Norwyche on Wednysday in the
mornyng at markett.

Dame Elizabeth Brewse shall lye at Jon Cookys; if it myght please yow,
I wold be glad that she myght dyne in your howse on Thursday, for ther
shold ye have most secret talkyng. And modyr, at the reverence of God,
beware that ye be so purveyd for, that ye take no cold by the wey
towards Norwyche, for it is the most peraylous marche that ever was seyn
by eny manys dayes that now lyveth; and I prey to Jesu preserve yow and
yours.

Wretyn at Topcroft, the viij. day of Marche.

  Your sone and humbyll servaunt,

  J. P.

    [Footnote 271-1: [From Fenn, ii. 220.] This letter evidently
    refers to a meeting arranged between Margaret Paston and Dame
    Elizabeth Brews on the subject of John Paston’s approaching
    marriage, which took place in the latter part of the year 1477.]

    [Footnote 272-1: _i.e._ cause to be tunned.]


902

SIR THOMAS BREWS TO SIR JOHN PASTON[272-2]

_To my ryght wurschypfull cosyn, Syr Jhon Paston, Knyght, be this letter
delivered, &c._

[Sidenote: 1477 / MARCH 8]

Ryght wurschypfull, and my hertely welebelovyd cosyn, I recommande me
unto yowe, desyring to here of yowr welefar, whech I pray God may be as
contynuall good as I wolde hafe myn own. And, cosyn, the cause of my
wryting un to yow, at thys tyme, is, I fele wele be my cosyn John yowr
broder, that ye hafe undyrstondyng of a mater, whech is in comynicacyon
tochyng a maryage, with Godds grace, to be concluded betwyx my saide
cosyn yowr broder, and my doghter Margery, wheche is far commonyd, and
not yyt concluded, ner noght schall ner may be tyll I hafe answer from
yowe agayn of yowr good will and asent to the seid mater; and also of
the obligacyon weche that I sende yowe herewith; for, cosyn, I wold be
sory to se owther my cosyn yowr broder, or my doghtr, dryvyn to leve so
meane a lyff as thei schuld do yf the vj^xx._li._ [£120], schuld be
payde of ther maryage money.

And cosyn, I hafe takyn my selfe so nere in levyng of this vj^xx._li._,
that wher as I hade layde upp an C_li._ for the maryage of a yonger
doghter of myn, I hafe nowe lent the saide C_li._ and xx_li._ over that,
to my cosyn yowr broder, to be paide ageyn be suche esy days as the
obligacyon, weche I sende yowe herwyth, specyfyes. And, cosyn, I were
ryght lothe to be stowe so mech uppon one doghter, that the other her
susters schuld far the wars; wherfor, cosyn, yf ye wyll that thys mater
schall take effect undyr suche forme as my cosyn yowr broder hath wretyn
unto yowe, I pray yowe put therto yowr good wylle, and sum of yowr
coste, as I hafe done of myn more largely then ever I purpose to do to
any tweyn of hyr susters, as God knowyth myn entent, Whom I besech to
send yowe yowr levest herts desyr.

Wretyn at Topcroft, the viij. day of March, &c.

  Be your cosyn,

  THOMAS BREWS, Knight.

    [Footnote 272-2: [From Fenn, ii. 224.] The date of this letter, as
    of the last, is fixed by the subject.]


903

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[273-1]

_To John Paston, Esquyer, in haste._

[Sidenote: 1477 / MARCH 9]

I have received yowr letter, and yow[r] man, J. Bykerton, by whom I
knowe all the mater off Mestresse Brews, whyche iff it be as he seythe,
I praye Godde brynge it to a goode ende.

Item, as for thys mater of Mestresse Barly,[274-1] I holde it but a bare
thynge. I feele weell that itt passyth nott . . . marke. I syghe hyr for
yowr sake. She is a lytell onys; she maye be a woman heer aftre, iff she
be nott olde nowe; hir person semyth xiij. yere off age; hyr yerys, men
sey, ben full xviij. She kowyth nott of the mater, I suppose;
neverthelesse she desyryd to see me as gladde as I was to se hyr.

I praye yow sende me some wryghtyng to Caleys off yowr spede with
Mestresse Brewys. Bykerton tellyth me that she lovyth yow weell. Iff I
dyed, I hadde lever ye hadde hyr than the Lady Wargrave; neverthelesse
she syngeth weell with an harpe.

Clopton is aferde off Sir T. Greye, for he is a wydower now late, and
men sey that he is aqueyntyd with hyr of olde.

No more. Wretyn on Sondaye, the ix. daye off Marche, anno E. iiij^ti
xvij^o to Caleys warde.

   *   *   *

Iff ye have Mestresse Brews, and E. Paston Mestresse Bylyngford, ye be
lyke to be bretheryn.

  J. PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 273-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]

    [Footnote 274-1: Fenn reads this name Burly, but I think
    erroneously.]


904

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[274-2]

_Thys bylle be delyverd to Thomas Grene, good man of the George, by
Powlys Wharffe, or to hys wyff, to send to Sir John Paston, wherso evere
he be, at Caleys, London, or other placys._

[Sidenote: 1477 / MARCH 9]

Ryght worchepfull sir, and my most good and kynde brodyr, in as humbyll
wyse as I can, I recomand me to yow. Sir, it is so that I have, sythe
John Bekurton departyd fro hens, ben at Toppcrofft at Syr Tohmas Brewse;
and as for the mater that I sent yow word of by Jon Bekurton, towchyng
my sylff and Mastress Margery Brews, I am yet at no serteynte, hyr fadyr
is so hard; but I trow I have the good wyll of my lady hyr modyr and
hyr; but as the mater provyth, I shall send yow woord, with Godes grace,
in short tyme.

But as for John Bekurton, I prey yow dele with hym for suerte as a
soudyor shold be delt with; trust hym never the more for the bylle that
I sent yow by hym, but as a man at wylde, for every thyng that he told
me is not trewe; for he departyd with ought lycence of hys mastyr, Syr
Thomas Brewse, and is fere endangeryd [_indebted_] to dyvers in thys
contrey. I prey God that I wryght not to yow of hym to late; but for all
thys I knowe none untrowthe in hym; but yet I prey yow, trust hym not
over myche upon my woord.

Syr, Perse Mody[275-1] recomandyth hym to your mastyrshep, and besecheth
yow to send hym word in hast, hough he shall be demeanyd at your place
at Caster; for he is asygnyd to no body as yet, to take of mete and
drynk, nor yet wher that he shall have money to paye for hys mete and
drynk; and now is the cheff replenysheing of your warenn there, the
avauntage of the dove howse wer well for hym, tyll ye come hom your
sylff.

Sir, I prey yow pardon me of my wryghtyng, hough so ever it be, for
carpenters of my crafte that I use now, have not alderbest ther wyttys
ther owne. And Jesu preserve yow.

Wretyn at Norwyche, the ix. day of Marche, anno E iiij^ti septimo
decymo.

  J. P.

    [Footnote 274-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]

    [Footnote 275-1: Perse Moody was a servant of Sir John Paston’s,
    now at Caister.--F.]


905

SIR THOMAS BREWS[275-2]

[Sidenote: 1477]

Memorandum.--To let my cosyn, Margaret Paston, ondyrstand that for a
jontor to be mad in Sweynsthorp in hand, and for a jontore of no more
but x. mark ought of Sparham, I wylle depart with CC. mark in hand, and
to give theym ther boord free as for ij. or iij. yer in serteyn, or
ellys CCC. mark with ought ther boord, payable by l. mark yerly tyll the
some of CCC. mark be full payed.

Item, I wyll geve CCCC. mark, payable l_li._, in hand at the day of
maryage, and l_li._ yerly tyll the some of CCCC. mark be full payed upon
thes condycyons folowing.

Wher of on condycyon is thys, that I wyll lend my cosyn John Paston
vj^xx._li._, besyd hys maryage money, to pledge ought the maner of
Sweynsthorpe, so that he may fynd syche a frend as wyll pay me a yen the
seyd vj^xx._li._ by xx. mark a yer, so that it be not payed of the
maryage money, nor of the propre goodes of my seyd cosyn John.

Or ellys, an other condycyon is thys, if it be so that my seyd cosyn
John may be suffred, fro the day of hys maryage to my doughter, to take
the hole profites of the maner of Sparham, besyde the maner of
Sweynsthorpe, for terme of ther two lyves, and the longest of theym
leveing, yet wyll I be agreable to depart with the seyd CCC. mark,
payable ayen in forme above seyd [_and to geve theym ther boord for a
yer or two_].[276-1]

And if thes or eny of the conclusyons may be takyn, I am agreable to
make the bargayn swer, or ellys no more to be spokyn of.

    [Footnote 275-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This paper was evidently
    drawn up about the same time as the last letter. It is a draft in
    John Paston’s handwriting, but is evidently written as in the name
    of Sir Thomas Brews. It is endorsed in a more modern hand: ‘A
    determinacion of Sir Tho. Brews how much he would gyve with his
    daughter Margery in mariage.’]

    [Footnote 276-1: These words are crossed out with the pen.]


906

JOHN PYMPE TO SIR JOHN PASTON[276-2]

_To Master Sir John Paston, be this letter delyverid in Calis._

[Sidenote: 1477 / [MARCH]]

Honwre and joye be to yow, my ryght gode master, and most assured
brother; letyng yow know that al yowre welwillers and servaunts, in
these partyes, that I know, fare well, and better wold, if they mowht
here of yowre wellbeyng, and forthwith sum of yowre Frenche and Borgoyne
tidyngs; ffor we in these partyes be in grete drede lest the French Kyng
with sum assaults shuld in eny wise distourbe yow of yowr soft, sote
[_sweet_], and sewre slepys, but as yet we no thyng can here that he so
disposeth hym.

Mary, we have herd sey, that the frowys[277-1] of Broggys, with there
hye cappes, have gyven sum of yow grete clappys, and that the fete of
her armys doyng is such, that they smyte al at the mowthe, and at the
grete ende of the thyeh; but in faith we care not for yow, for we know
well that ye be gode ynowh at defence. But we here sey, that they be of
such corage, that they gyve yow moo strokys than ye do to them, and that
they strike sorer than ye also. But I thynk that the English ladyes and
jentylwomen, and the pore also, can do as well as they, and lyst not to
lerne of them no thyng; and therefor we drede lest ther hye corages
shuld meve them to make yow warre also. But God defend, for by my trowth
than have ye much to do; for hit were better and more ese for to labor
iij. or fowre dayes with mattokks and pykeisys to over turne yowr sande
hills, as we here saye ye do ryht wurshipfully, than only one day to
endure theyre fers encountrys; so as ye myht owther gete or save yowr
wurshippys by; and loke that ye trust to have no rescow of us, for, so
God me helpe, we have y nowh to do in these partyes with the same werrs.
But in one thyng we preyse yowre sadnessys and discrecionys ryht much,
that is, in kepyng of yowr trewse and pese with the Kyng of Fraunce, as
the Kyng hath commaundid; and a grete reson why, for hit were to much
for yow to have werre with all the world at onys, ffor the werre a fore
seid kepith yow blameles; ffor every resonable man wetyth well, that hit
is to much for eny pepyll levyng to do bothe at onys.

Syr, as for the more parts off my thowht, I praye yow recomaunde me un
to yowr self, prayyng yow that y may contynew in such case as yowr
godenes hath taken me of old, and if ye lyst to send eny tydyngs, or
other thyng to the partyes that were wont to warme theym by yowr fyre,
in feith I shall do yowr erand.

And as for barley, hit is of the same pryce that hit was wont to be of,
and is the most sure corne, and best enduryng that may be. And, syr,
where that sumtyme was a lytyll hole in a wall, is now a dore large
ynowh and esy passage, whereof ye were the deviser, and have thank for
yowr labor of sum partyes, but no thyng lastyth evyr. Y mene that y
trow, my passage shall hastyly faile me, and the dore shalbe shet up
agayne, lesse than Fortun be agreable to have my counseile kept; for not
long ago, makyng my entre at that passage, I saw a sparow that useth
those ewrys [_eireys_], and I saw her sytt so stille that y cowde not
endure, but y must neds shote her, and so, God me help, I smote her,
I trow evyn to the hert; and so I drede me lest owther the barley wyll
ete the sparow, or ells the sparow wyll ete the barley, but as yet all
is well, but reson shewt me that hit must neds fayle by contynewauns,
lesse than I forsake bothe the sparow and the barley also.[278-1]

Syr, I have thank for the shew that I onys made of yow and daily
gramercy, and ye theire prayer.

Syr, forthemore I beseche yow, as ye wyll do eny thyng for me, that ye
se o day for my sake, and for yowr own plesure, all the gode hors in
Caleys, and if ther be among theym eny pric[278-2] horse of deds, that
is to sell, in especiall that he be well trottyng of his owne corage,
with owte fors[278-3] of sporis, and also a steryng [_stirring_] hors if
he be, he is the better; I pray yow send me word of his color, deds, and
corage, and also of his price, feynyng as ye wold by hym yowrself, and
also I wold have hym sumwhat large, not with the largest; but no smalle
hors, as more than a dowble hors; prayyng yow above all thyngs to have
this in remembrauns, and that hastily as may be, for ther is late
promysed me help to such an entent, and I wote not how long hit shall
endure; and therfor I beseche yow send me word by tyme.

I trow the Frenshe men have taken up al the gode hors in Pycardye, and
also they be wont to be hevy hors in labor, and that I love not, but a
hevy hors of flesh, and lyht of corage y love well, for y love no hors
that wyll al way be lene and slender like grehounds. God kepe yow.

  Yowr,

  J. PYMPE.

Y pray yow to recomaund me to my cosyn Sir John Scot and all his, in
especiall Mastres Benyngfeld.[279-1]

    [Footnote 276-2: [From Fenn, ii. 226.] This letter, Fenn tells us,
    was endorsed under the address in a handwriting of the time which
    he believed to be Sir John Paston’s--‘Jon Pympe, xvj. die Mar’.,
    anno E. 4, 17,’ showing the date at which it was received.]

    [Footnote 277-1: _Frau’s_, _i.e._ women. The writer’s pleasantry
    in this passage is certainly rather coarse.]

    [Footnote 278-1: Perhaps this enigmatical passage may have
    reference to the Mrs. Barly mentioned in No. 903.]

    [Footnote 278-2: In the modern version, Fenn reads here, ‘any
    prized horse of deeds,’ a reading which seems to me questionable.]

    [Footnote 278-3: ‘Fort’ in Fenn, which is probably a misprint, as
    the word is spelled ‘force’ on the opposite page.]

    [Footnote 279-1: Margaret, daughter of Sir John Scot, and wife to
    Edmund Bedingfeld.--F.]


907

JOHN PYMPE TO SIR JOHN PASTON[279-2]

_To Syr John Paston, Knyht, be this delyverid in Calice._

[Sidenote: 1477 / [MARCH?]]

Master Paston, I recommaund me to yow; and by cause that I have wrytyn
to yow iij. long letteres; which as yet be answereles, I wote not
whether that the length of mater acumbred yow, or elles the simpylnes of
the effect displesid yow, or elles that ye have utterly refusid the
proferes of my pore servyce and frendeship; but which of these soo ever
hit be, hit hevyeth me.

Syr, hit nedith not, I trow, to send yow the tidynges of these partyes,
how be hit I have thryes send yow such as here were, in entent that ye
shuld send us of yowres; but as long as my lord and yowres is there, ye
can not faile to have the certeynte of all owre English aventures, which
is grete ese to yowr frendes and servauntes in this contre, for so much
as they may make her letteres shorter by so much.

Syr, at the wrytyng of this letter, I was in Kent, where all thyng that
I rejoisid, I wishid yow part of, or all; and as for myself, I am styll
yowr servaunt and bedeman, and so am bownd to be so sore and sewrely,
that I can not unbynde me.

Syr, this is the v. letter that I have sent yow, whereyn thys entent
that folowyth was all wayes on, that is to say, that hit plesid yow sum
on day to take so much labour for me for to se the jentyllest hors in
Calice that is to be sold, and to lett me know of his colowre, dedes,
and price, remembryng that he be also large as mesure wyll, for I love
no small hors, nor hors that wyll evyr be lene and slendyr; but I wold
have hym hye truttyng, if hit wylbe, and if he be styryng with all, he
shall plese me the better, for I wuld have hym all for the plesur, and
for the werre, but if he myht be for bothe. Veryly ther is no tidynges
on that side the se, safe only the welfare of yow and all other there,
that I wuld so fayne here of as of a jentyll trottyng hors that were
lyght and pleasaunt in dedes, if eny such be there. Flemysh hors I thenk
ye have y nowh that wyll play for a myle or ij., but such we have here
also; how be hit I pray yow send me word of yowre store, and be sewre of
the price, if ye like eny, or elles let sum man for yow.

No more, but God kepe yow, prayyng yow to recommaund me to my cosyn Syr
John Scot, and to Syr Tyry Robsert. Let the letter be sent to the
godewif of yowr loggyng.

  By yowr JOHN PYMPE.

    [Footnote 279-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter was probably
    written about the end of March 1477, as the first of the three
    which preceded (No. 906) was received by Sir John in Calais on the
    16th of the month.]


908

JOHN PYMPE TO SIR JOHN PASTON[280-1]

_To Master Sir John Paston, Knight, be this letter delyvered in Calis._

[Sidenote: 1477]

  Fresh amorouse sihts of cuntreys ferre and straunge
  Have all fordoone[280-2] your old affeccion;
  In plesurys new, your hert dooth score and raunge
  So hye and ferre, that like as the fawcon
  Which is alofte, tellith scorne to loke a down
  On hym that wont was her feders to pyke and ympe;[281-1]
  Ryht so forgotyn ye have your pore Pympe,

  That wrytith, sendith, and wisshith alday your wele
  More than his owne; but ye ne here, ne se,
  Ne sey, ne send, and evyr I write and sele
  In prose and ryme, as well as hit will be.
  Sum evyll tong, I trow, myss sayeth of me
  And ells your fast and feithfull frendelynes
  Ye thenk mysspent on such as I, I gesse.

  I wyll abate my customable concourse,
  To yow so costuouse,[281-2] whan so evyr ye com agayn,
  Which that I fele of reson, by the course
  Of my proferid servyce, hath made yow so unfayne;
  For veryly the water of the fowntayne
  With brede only forthwith yowre presens
  Me shuld content much more than your expense.

  But ay deme I thus that Fortun hath hyryd yow,
  For she but late of sorowys moo than many
  Hath rakyd un to myn hert an hepe more than a moowe,
  And wuld that ye shuld ley thereon on hye
  Your hevy unkyndenes to make hit fast to lye,
  And God knowth well hit cannot long lye there
  But hit wyll bryng me to the chirch bere.

  Take hit awaye therefore, y praye yow fayre,
  For hardyly my hert beryth hevy y nowh,
  For there is Sorow at rest as in hys chayre,
  Fixid so fast with hys prikks rowh,
  That in gode feith I wote not whan I lowh,[281-3]
  For, Master Paston, the thyng whereon my blisse
  Was holly sette, is all fordoone, I wysse.

    By your JOHN PYMPE,
    thes beyng the vj. letter that I have send yow.

Alway prayyng yow to remembre the hors that I have in every letter
wryten for; as thus, that hit wuld plese yow to undrestond who hath the
gentyllest hors in trottyng and steryng that is in Calis, and if he be
to sell, to send me word of hys pris, largenesse, and colour. Hytt is
told me, that the Master Porter hath a coragiouse ronyd hors, and that
he wuld putt hym away by cause he is daungerous in companye; and of that
I force [_care_] not, so that he be not chorlissh at a spore, as
plungyng; and also I sett not by hym, but if he trotte hye and gentilly.
No more, but God kepe yow.

  JOHN PYMPE.

    [Footnote 280-1: [From Fenn, ii. 234.] We may as well place this
    letter--the only remaining one of the series that has been
    preserved--immediately after the other two. John Pympe seems to
    have been a very industrious correspondent, and the art of
    writing, in prose or verse, came to him very easily.]

    [Footnote 280-2: Destroyed.--F.]

    [Footnote 281-1: A term in Falconry, signifying the adding a piece
    to a feather in a hawk’s wing.--F.]

    [Footnote 281-2: Expensive.]

    [Footnote 281-3: Laughed? Fenn in his modern version reads ‘when I
    love.’]


909

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[282-1]

_To hys weell belovyd brother, John Paston, Esquyer._

[Sidenote: 1477]

I recomande me to yow, letyng yow weete that I receyvyd a letter of
yowres by Edward Hensted ij. dayes aftre that Whetley was departyd from
me, whyche he hadde forgetyn in hys caskett, as he seyde, wheroff I
sholde have sent yow answer by Whetley, iff I had hadde it toffore he
wente, notwithstandyng I am ryght lothe to wryghte in that mater offte;
for for a conclusion I wrote to my moodre by Peerse Moody alle that I
myght and wolde doo ther in. Ye have also nowe wretyn ageyn. Yow neede
nott to praye me to doo that myght be to yowr profyght and worship, that
I myght doo ofter than ones, or to late me weete theroff; for to my
power I wolde do for yow, and take as moche peyne for yowr weell, and
remembre itt when per case ye sholde nott thynke on it yowr selffe.
I wolde be as gladde that one gaffe yow a maner of xx_li._ by yeer, as
iff he gave it to my selff by my trowthe.

Item, wher ye thynke that I may with concience recompence it ageyn on to
owr stokke off other londys that I have off that valywe in fee symple,
it is so that Snaylwell, by my grauntefadres will ones, and by my fadris
will sceconderely, is entaylyd to the issyw of my fadres body.

Item, as for Sporle xx_li._ by yeer, I hadde ther off butt xx. marke by
yere, whyche xx. marke by yeer and the x. marke ovyr, I have endangeryd,
as ye weell knowe off that bargayne, whyche, iff itt be nott redemyd,
I most recompence some other maner off myne to one off my bretheryn for
the seyde x. marke, ovyr xx. marke that longyth to me; wherffor I kepe
the maner off Runham. Than have I fe symple londe the maner of Wynterton
with Bastwyk and Billys, whyche in alle is nott xx. marke by yeer,
whyche is nott to the valywe off the maner off Sparham. And as for
Castre, it weer noo convenyent londe to exchange for suche a thyng, nor
it weer not polesy for me to sett that maner in suche case for alle
maner of happis. I nede nott to make thys excuse to yowe, but that yowr
mynde is troblyd. I praye yow rejoyse nott yowr sylffe to moche in hope
to opteyne thynge that alle yowr freendys may nott ease yow off; for if
my moodre were dysposyd to gyve me and any woman in Ingelande the best
maner that she hathe, to have it to me and my wyffe, and to the heyres
off our too bodyes begotyn, I wolde nott take it off hyr, by God.

Stablysshe your selffe uppon a goode grownde, and grace shall folowe.
Yowr mater is ferre spoken off, and blowyn wyde, and iff it preve noo
better, I wolde that it had never be spoken off. Also that mater noysyth
me that I am so onkynde that I lett alle togedre. I thynke notte a mater
happy, nor weell handelyd, nor poletykly dalte with, when it can never
be fynysshyd with owte an inconvenyence; and to any suche bargayne I
kepe never to be condescentyng, ner of cowncell. Iffe I weer att the
begynnyng of suche a mater, I wolde have hopyd to have made a better
conclusyon, if they mokke yow notte. Thys mater is drevyn thus ferforthe
with owte my cowncell, I praye yow make an ende with owte my cowncell.
Iffe it be weell, I wolde be glad; iff it be oderwyse, it is pite.
I praye yow troble me no moore in thys mater. . . .[283-1]

    [Footnote 282-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter is clearly
    written in answer to an application by John Paston to his brother
    to aid him in making arrangements with Sir Thomas Brews in the
    spring of 1477. Although the signature is lost, the handwriting is
    that of Sir John Paston.]

    [Footnote 283-1: The lower part of this letter seems to have been
    cut off, and how much is lost does not appear.]

  [[for for a conclusion I wrote to my moodre
  _text unchanged: probably not an error_]]


910

JOHN PASTON AND MARGERY BREWS[284-1]

[Sidenote: 1477]

Memorandum.--To kepe secret fro my moder that the bargayn is full
concludyd.

Item, to let hyr have fyrst knowlage that in the chapell, wher as ye
wold had ben no book nye by x. myle, that whyn Mastyr Brews seyd that he
wold shortly have eyther more lond in joyntour then Sweynsthorp and x.
mark ought of Sparham, or ellys that some frend of myne shold paye the
vj^xx._li._, so that it shold not be payed of the maryage money, that
then I sware on a book to hym that I wold never of my mocyon endanger
moder nor broder ferther then I had done; for I thought that my modyr
had done myche for me to geve me the maner of Sparham in syche forme
as she had done. But Mastyr Breus wyll not agre, with ought that my
mastress hys doughter and I be mad swer of it now in hand, and that we
may take the hole profytes, what so ever fortune.

Item, to enforme my moder that if so be that we may be pute in
possessyon of all the hole maner duryng oure two lyves, and the lengest
of leveing, that then Mastyr Brews wyll geve me in maryage with my
mastresse hys doughter CCCC. markes, payable in hand l_li._, and so
yerly l_li._ tyll the some of CCCC. mark bew full payed.

Item, that wher as he had leyd up C_li._ for the maryage of a yonger
doughter of hys, he wylle lend me the same C_li._ and xx_li._ more, to
pledge ought my lond, and he to be payed ayen hys C_li._ and xx_li._ by
x_li._ by yer.

Item, to avyse my modyr that she brek not for the yerly valew of Sparham
above the x. mark dwryng hyr lyve.

    [Footnote 284-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This paper, which is in
    John Paston’s hand, was evidently written about the same time as
    the letter immediately following, in which it is mentioned that
    Margaret Paston had given up the manor of Sparham to her son. The
    paper is endorsed in a more modern hand: ‘Notes touching the
    mariage betwene Jo. Paston, Ar’, and Margery Brews.’]


911

SIR JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[285-1]

_To my ryght worshypfull moodre, Margret Paston._

[Sidenote: 1477 / MARCH 28]

Please it yow to weete, that I have receyvyd yowr letter, wherein is
remembryd the gret hurte, that by liklihod myght ffalle to my brother,
iff so be that thys matter betwyn hym and Sir Thomas Brewses doghtre
take nott effecte; wheroff I wolde be as sory as hym selffe reasonably;
and also the welthy and convenyent marriage that scholde be iff it take
effecte; wheroff I wolde be as gladde as any man; and ame better content
nowe, that he sholde have hyr, than any other, that evyr he was
hertoffoor abowte to have hadde, consyderyd hyr persone, her yowthe, and
the stok that she is comyn offe, the love on bothe sydes, the tendre
ffavor that she is in with hyr ffader and mooder, the kyndenesse off hyr
ffadr and moodr to hyr in departyng with hyr, the ffavor also, and goode
conceyte that they have in my brother, the worshypfull and vertuous
dysposicion off hyr ffadr and moodr, whyche pronostikyth that, of
lyklihod, the mayde sholde be vertuous and goode; all which concyderyd,
and the necessary relyffe that my brother most have, I mervayle the
lesse, that ye have departyd, and gevyn hym the maner off Sperham, in
such fforme as I have knowleche off by W. Gornay, Lomner, and Skypwyth;
and I ame ryght gladde to se in yow suche kyndenesse on to my brother as
ye have doon to hym; and wolde by my trowthe lever than C_li._ that it
weer ffee symple londe, as it is entaylyd, whyche by liklyhood scholde
prosper with hym and hys blode the better in tyme to come, and sholde
also never cause debate in owr bloode in tyme to come, whyche Godde
dyffende, ffor that weer onnaturell.

Item, another inconvenyence is, wher as I undrestande that the maner is
gevyn to my brother, and to hys wyff, and to the issywe bytwen them
bygoten; iff the case weer soo, that he and she hadde yssywe togedr a
dowtr or moo, and hys wyffe dyed, and he maried afftr another, and hadde
issywe a sone, that sone sholde have noon londe, and he beyng hys
ffadres heyr, and ffor th’enconvenyence that I have knowe let in
ur[286-1] in case lyke, and yit enduryth in Kente, by tweyn a jentylman
and his suster, I wolde ye toke the advyce off yowr concell in thys
poynt, and that that is past yow by wrightyng or by promise, I deme
verrely in yow, that ye dyd it off kyndenesse, and in eschywyng off a
moor yll that myght befall.

Item, wher as it pleasyth yow that I sholde ratefye, grawnt, or conferme
the seyd gyfte on to my brother, it is so, that with myn honeste I may
nott, and ffor other cawses. The Pope will suffre a thyng to be usyd,
but he will nott lycence nor grant it to be usyd nor don, and soo I. My
brother John knowyth myn entent weel i now heer to ffoor in this mater;
I will be ffownde to hym as kynde a brother as I may be.

Item, iff it be soo that Sir T. Brews and hys wyff thynke that I wolde
troble my brother and hys wyff in the seid maner, I can ffynde no meene
to putte them in sywerte ther off, but iff it neede, to be bownde in an
obligacion with a condicion that I shalle nott trowble ner infete them
therin.

Item, I thynke that she is made sywer i now in astate in the londe, and
that off ryght I deme they shall make noone obstacles at my wryghtyng,
ffor I hadde never none astate in the londe, ner I wolde nott that I had
hadde.

No mor to yow at thys tyme, but Allmyghty God have yow in kepyng.

Wretyn at Caleys, the xxviij. daye of Marche, anno E. iiij. xvij^{o}.

  By yowr sone,

  J. PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 285-1: [From Fenn, ii. 238.]]

    [Footnote 286-1: In ure, _i.e._ in practice.]

  [[J. PASTON, K.
  _comma invisible_]]


912

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[287-1]

_To John Paston, Esquyer._

[Sidenote: 1477 / APRIL 14]

Ryght worshypfull and hertely belovyd brother, I recomaunde me to yow,
letyng yow weete, that as by Pyrse Moody, when he was heer, I hadde no
leyser to sende answer in wryghtyng to yow, and to my cosyne Gurnaye,
off yowr letteris; butt ffor a conclusion ye shalle ffynde me to yow as
kynde as I maye be, my conciense and worshyp savyd, whiche, when I speke
with yow and them, ye bothe shall weell undrestande. And I praye God
sende yow as goode speede in that mater as I wolde ye hadde, and as I
hope ye shall have er thys letter come to yow; and I praye God sende yow
yssywe betwyne yow, that maye be as honorable as ever was any off your
ancestris and theris, wheroff I wolde be as gladde in maner as off myn
owne. Wherffor I praye yow sende me worde how ye doo, and iff Godde
ffortune me to doo weell, and be off any power, I woll be to Sir Thomas
Brewse, and my lady hys wyffe, a verry sone in lawe ffor yowr sake, and
take them as ye doo, and doo ffor them as iff I weer in case like with
them as ye bee. No moor, but Jesus have yow in kepyng.

Wretyn at Caleys, the xiiij. daye off Aprill, anno E. iiij. xvij^{o}.

As ffor tydyngs her, the Frenshe Kynge hathe gothen many off the towns
off the Duk of Burgoyne, as Seynt Quyntyns, Abevyle, Motrell; and now
off late he hathe goten Betoyne and Hedynge with the castell ther,
whyche is one off the ryallest castells off the worlde; and on Sonday at
evyn the Ameralle off Fraunce leyde seege at Boloyne; and thys daye it
is seyde, that the Frenshe Kynge shalle come thyddr; and thys nyght it
is seyde, that ther was a vysion seyne abowte the walls of Boloyne, as
it hadde ben a woman with a mervylowse lyght; men deme that Owr Lady
ther will shewe hyrselff a lover to that towne. God fforfende that it
weer Frenshe, it weer worthe xl.m^l._li._ [£40,000] that it wer
Englyshe.

  J. PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 287-1: [From Fenn, ii. 244.]]


913

MARGARET PASTON TO DAME ELIZABETH BREWS[288-1]

_To the ryght wurchypfull and my verry good [lady and cosyn, Dame
Elyzabet][288-2] Brews._

[Sidenote: 1477 / JUNE 11]

Ryght wurchepful and my cheff lady and cosyn, as hertly as I can,
I recomaunde me to yow. Madam, lyeketh yow to undyrstand that the cheff
cause of my wrytyng to yow at thys season ys thys: I wot well yt ys not
unremembred with yow the large comunycacyon that dyvers tymes hathe ben
had towchyng the maryage of my cosyn Margery, yowyr dowghter, and my son
John; of whyche I have ben as glad, and now late wardes as sory, as evyr
I was for eny maryage in myn lyve. And wher or in whom the defawte of
the breche ys, I can have no perfyte knowlage; but, madam, yf yt be in
me or eny of myn, I prey yow assygne a day when my cosyn yowyr husbond
and ye thynk to be at Norwych to wardes Salle, and I wyll com theder to
yow; and I thynk or ye and I departe, that the defawte schall be knowe
where yt ys, and also that, with yowyr advyse and helpe and myn to
gedyrs, we schall take some wey that yt schal not breke; for yf yt dyd,
yt wer non honoure to neyther partyes, and in cheff to them in whom the
defawte ys, consyderyng that it ys so ferre spokun.

And, madam, I prey yow that I may have perfyte knowlage be my son
Yelverton,[288-3] berar here of, when thys metyng schall be, yf ye thynk
it expedyent, and the soner the better, in eschewyng of worsse; for,
madam, I know well, yf yt be not concludyd in ryght schort tyme, that as
for my son he entendyth to doo ryght well by my cosyn Margery, and not
so well by hym sylf, and that schuld be to me, nor I trust to yow no
gret plesur, yf yt so fortunyd, as God deffend, Whom I beseche to send
yow your levest desyers.

Madam, I besech yow that I may be recomawndyd by this bylle to my cosyn
yowr husbond, and to my cosyn Margery, to whom I supposyd to have gevyn
an othyr name or thys tyme.

Wretyn at Mawteby, on Seynt Barnaby is Day.

  By your,

  MARGARET PASTON.

    [Footnote 288-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This is another letter
    relative to the negotiations for the marriage of John Paston and
    Margery Brews, which took place in 1477.]

    [Footnote 288-2: The words bracketed are indistinct, but we follow
    Fenn’s reading.]

    [Footnote 288-3: William Yelverton, grandson of Judge Yelverton,
    now married to Anne Paston, one of Margaret’s daughters.]


914

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[289-1]

_To John Paston, Esquyer._

[Sidenote: 1477 / JUNE 23]

I recomand me to yow, letyng yow weete that I have spoken to Herry
Colett,[289-2] and entretyd hym in my best wyse ffor yow, soo that at
the last he is agreyd to a resonable respyght ffor the xv_li._ that ye
sholde have payd hym at Mydsomer, as he seyth, and is gladde to do yow
ease or plesyr in all that he maye; and I tolde hym that ye wolde, as I
supposyd, be heer at London, herr nott long to, and than he lokyth afftr
that ye sholde come see hym, ffor he is sheryff, and hathe a goodely
hows.

Item, my Lady off Oxenfforth[289-3] lokyth afftr yow and Arblaster
bothe.

My Lord off Oxenfford[289-4] is nott comen in to Inglonde that I can
perceyve, and so the goode lady hathe nede off helpe and cowncell howe
that she shall doo.

No moor at thys tyme, butt God have yow in kepyng.

Wretyn att London on Seynt Awdryes Daye, anno E. iiij^ti xvij^{o}.

Tydyngs butt that yisterdaye my Lady Marqueys off Dorset,[290-1] whych
is my Lady Hastyngs dowtr, hadyd chylde a sone.

Item, my Lord Chamberleyn is comyn hyddr ffro Caleys, and redyn with the
Kynge to Wyndeshor, and the Kyng will be here ageyn on Mondaye.

  J. P., K.

    [Footnote 289-1: [From Fenn, ii. 248.]]

    [Footnote 289-2: Sir Henry Colet was Lord Mayor of London in
    1486.--F.]

    [Footnote 289-3: Margaret, daughter of Richard Neville, Earl of
    Salisbury; she was, during the imprisonment of her lord, in great
    distress.--F.]

    [Footnote 289-4: John de Vere, Earl of Oxford, was at this time a
    prisoner in the Castle of Hammes, in Picardy; what expectation
    there was of his coming into England at this time I know not.--F.]

    [Footnote 290-1: Cecily, wife of Thomas Grey, Marquis of Dorset,
    was great grand-daughter and heir of William Bonvile, Lord
    Bonvile, who was beheaded by order of Margaret of Anjou, after the
    second battle of St. Albans in 1461.]


915

JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[290-2]

[Sidenote: 1477 / JUNE 29]

Ryght worchepfull and my most good and kynd moder. Moder, in as humbyll
wyse as I can or may, I recomand me to yow, and beseche yow of your
dayly blyssyng. Moder, please it yow to undyrstond that tyll thys day
Dame Elyzabeth Brews hathe ben so syke that she myght nevyr, sythe she
cam to Salle, have leyser to comon of my mater with Master Brews tyll
thys day; and thys day with gret peyn, I thynk the rather because
Heydon[290-3] was ther, the mater was comond, but other answer than she
hathe sent yow in hyr lettre closed her in can she not have of hyr
husbond. Wherfor, modyr, if it please yow, myn advyse is to send hyr
answer ayen in thys forme folowing, of some other manys hand.

[_Margaret Paston to Dame Elyzabeth Brews._]

‘Ryght worchepfull and my verry good lady and cosyn, as hertly as I can,
I recomand me to yow. And, madam, I am ryght sory, if it myght be
otherwyse, of the dysease, as I undyrstand by the berer herof, that my
cosyn your husbond and ye also have had a season, whyche I prey God
soone to redresse to your bothe easeis. And, madam, I thank yow hertly
that ye have remembred the mater to my cosyn your husbond, that I spak
with you of at syche tyme as I was last with you at Norwyche, to my gret
comfort. And I wyse, madam, I am ryght sory that John Paston is no more
fortunate then he is in that mater; for, as I undyrstand by your lettyr,
my cosyn your husbond wyll geve but an C_li._, whyche is no money lyek
for syche a joyntore as is desyred of my son, thow hys possybylyte wer
ryght easy. But, madam, when I mad that large grant in the maner of
Sperham that I have mad to hym and my cosyn your doughter, he told me of
an other some that he shold have with hyr then of an C_li._ He hathe
befor thys be wont to tell me none untrowthe; and what I shall deme in
thys mater, I can not sey, for me thynkyth if more then an C_li._ wer
promysyd on to hym by my cosyn your husbond and yow, that ye wold not
lett to geve it hym, with ought so wer that I or he abryggyd eny thyng
of our promess, whyche I wot well neyther I or he intend to do, if I may
undyrstand that hys seying to me was trowthe, and that it may be
performyd; but wyst I that he told me otherwyse then my cosyn yowr
husbond and ye promysed hym, to deseyve me of Sparham, by my trowthe,
thow he have it, he shall lese as myche for it, iff I leve, and that
shall he well undyrstand the next tyme I se hym.

‘And, madam, I pray God send us good of thys mater, for as for hys
broder Sir John also, I sent ones to hym for it to have mad good the
same graunt that I grauntyd yow with hys assent, to them and to ther
issu of ther ij. bodyes lawfully comyng, and he dyd not ther in as I
desyred hym. And ther for I prey yow pardon me for sendyng on to hym eny
more; for, madam, he is my sone, and I can not fynd in my hert to becom
a dayly petycyoner of hys, sythe he hathe denyed me onys myn axing.
Peraventure he had ben better to have performyd my desyer; and what hys
answer was on to me, John Paston can tell yow as well as I. But, madam,
ye ar a moder as well as I, wher I prey tak it non other wyse bot well,
that I may not do by John Paston, as ye wyll have me to do; for, madam,
thow I wold he dyd well, I have to purvey for more of my chylder then
hym, of whyche some be of that age, that they can tell me well inow that
I dele not evenly with theym to geve John Paston so large, and theym so
lytyll; and, madam, for syche grwgys and other causys, I am ryght sory
that the graunte is knowyn that I have mad, with ought it myght take
effect. And therfor, madam, fro hensforthe I remyght all thyng to yowr
dyscressyon, besechyng yow, the rather for my sake, to be my son Johnis
good lady; and I prey God preserve yow to Hys plesure, send yow hastyly
yowr hele ayen, and my cosyn yowr husbond also, to whom I prey yow that
I may hertly be recomandyd, and to my cosyns Margery and Margaret
Byllyngforthe.

‘Wretyn at Mawtby, on Seynt Petrys Day.

  ‘Yowr,

  ‘MARGARET PASTON.’


_‘An other lettyr to me that I may shewe._

‘I gret yow well, and send you Godes blessyng and myn, letyng yow wet
that I undyrstand well by my cosyn, Dame Elyzabeth Brewsys lettyr,
whyche I sende yow her with, wherby ye may undyrstand the same, that
they intend not to performe thos proferys that ye told me they promysyd
yow, trustyng that ye told me none other wyse then was promysed yow.
Wherfor I charge yow on my blyssyng that ye be well ware how ye bestow
your mynd with ought ye have a substance wher upon to leve; for I wold
be sory to wet yow myscary; for if ye do, in your defawt looke never
aftyr helpe of me. And also I wold be as sory for hyr as for eny
gentywoman leveing, in good feythe; wherfor I warne yow, be ware in eny
wyse; and look ye be at Mawtby with me as hastyly as ye can, and then I
shall tell yow more. And God kepe yow.

‘Wretyn at Mawtby, on Seynt Petrys Day.

  ‘Your modyr,

  ‘M. P.’

    [Footnote 290-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter, with the
    two subjoined, are drafts written on the same paper in John
    Paston’s hand. They must belong to the year 1477, being on the
    same subject, already so often referred to, of the negotiations
    for John Paston’s marriage. Fenn had added addresses to all these
    letters, and a signature to the first, which are not in the
    original MS.]

    [Footnote 290-3: John Heydon of Baconsthorpe, who died on the 27th
    September 1479.--Inquisition p.m., 19 Edw. IV., No. 72.]


916

SIR JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[293-1]

_To the ryght worshypfull Mestresse Margret Paston._

[Sidenote: 1477 / AUG. 7]

Please it yow to weete that I have receyvyd yowr letter, wretyn the
Tywesdaye nexte afftre Seynt James Daye, wherin ye desyre me to remembre
Kokett, and also to be helpyng to my brother Johnes mariage. As for
Kokett, as God helpe me, I knowe nott yitt the meanes possible that I
myght paye hym by thatt daye, ffor thoos materis that be off grettest
wyght and charge, and that stonde nerrest my weell, that is to seye, the
sywerte off the maner off Castre, and the mater betwen Anne Hault and me
shall, with Goddes grace, thys terme be at a perffyght ende, whyche will
charge me fferther than I have mony as yitt, or lyke to have byffor that
tyme, off myne owne, and, as God helpe me, I wote nott where to borow.

Item, I most paye with in thys iij. yeer iiij^c. [400] marke to
Towneshende, or ellis fforffett the maner off Sporle, and thus my
charges be gretter than I maye a weye with, concidryd suche helpe as I
have; and iff it ffortunyd that I fforffetyd the maner off Sporle, ye
weer never lyke to se me myry afftre, so God helpe me. Ye gave me ones
xx_li._ to it wardes, and ye promyttyd as moche, whyche I receyvyd, and
synnys off my mony off seide maner growyng that come to yowr handys was
receyvyd by yow ageyn the seyd xl_li._, whyche, when Kokett scholde be
payed, was nott yowr ease to departe wyth. Neverthelesse ye may yitt,
when yow lyketh, perfforme yowr sayde gyffte and promyse, and thys somme
owyng to Kokett is nott so moche; neverthelesse I suppose that ye be
nott so weell purveyed. Wherffor, iff it please yow at yowr ease her
afftre to performe yowr seyde gyffte and promyse, so that I may have it
with in a yer or ij. or yitt iij., I sholde per case gete yowr
obligacion to yow ageyn ffrom Kokett, and he pleasyd. Wherffor I beseche
yow that I maye have an assyngnement of suche dettes as been owyng yow,
payeable at leyser off suche mony as is owyng ffor the woode at
Basyngham or ellys wher; ffor, so God helpe me, I sholde ellys wylfully
ondoo myselffe, wherin I beseche yow to sende me an answer in hast.

Item, as towchyng the mariage off my brother John, I have sente hym myn
advyce, and tolde hym wherto he shall truste, and I have grauntyd hym as
moche as I maye. I wolde that I weer at on communycacion atwyen them for
hys sake, whyche I sholde if I myght. As for my comyng home, I ame nott
yitt sertayn therof; I shalle hast me as faste as I canne, with the
grace of God, Who have yow in Hys kepyng.

I beseche yow to remembre the premyssis, and to helpe me, and with
Goddes grace, thes ij. materis above wretyn, bothe of Castre and
Mestresse Anne Hault, shall be endyd to my profyth and rest, and moor
ovyr, er awghte longe to, with Goddes grace, the maner of Sporle to be
owte of danger; promyttyng yow that I shall doo in Kokettes mater as
moche as is possible for me to doo to yower plesyr. It shall never neede
to prykk nor threte a free horse. I shall do whatt I can.

Wretyn the Thorysdaye next byffore Seynt Lawrence, anno E. iiij^ti xvij.

  By yowre sone,

  JOHN PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 293-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]


917

MARGARET PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[294-1]

[Sidenote: 1477 / AUG. 11]

Yt ys soo that I undyrstonde be yowyr letter wretyn the Thyrsday nexte
be fore Seynt Lauerons, that ze wulde have knowlage how that I wuld be
demenyd in Cokettes mater; qweche I send you here undyr wretyn. I putte
yow in certeyn that I wull nevyr pay him peny of that duty that ys owyng
to hym, thow he sue me for yt, not of myn owyn pursse; for I wul nat be
compellyd to pay yowyr dettes azens my well, and thow I wuld, I may nat.
Where fore I a wyse yow to see me savyd harmelesse azens hym for yowyr
owyn a wauntage in tyme cumyng, for yf I pay yt, at longe wey ze xall
bere the losse.

And where as ze wryte to me that I gave yow xx_li._, and promysyd odyr
xx_li._, that ys nat soo, for I wutte wele yf I had soo doon, ze wuld
nat assynyd me be yowyr letterys of yowyr owyn hande wrytyng, the whech
I have to schew, that I schuld resseyve a zen the same summe of Wylliam
Pecok, and of yowyr fermores, and byars of yowyr wood of Sporle; and
take this for a full conclusyon in thys mater, for yt xall be noon othyr
wyse for me than I wryte here to yow.

I mervel meche that ze have delte azen soo symply wyth Sporle,
consyderyng that ze and yowyr frendys had so meche to doo for to geetyt
yow azen onys; and ye havyng noo gretter materes of charge than ze have
had sythyn yt was laste pleggyt owte, yt causyth me to be in gret dowte
of yow what yowyr dysposycion wul be here aftyr for swheche lyfelood as
I have be dysposyd before this tyme to leve yow after my decesse. For I
thynke veryly that ye wulde be dysposyd here aftyr to selle or sette to
morgage the lond that ye xulde have after me yowyr modyr as gladdly and
rathyr than that lyfe lood that ye have after yowyr fadyr. Yt grevyth me
to thynke upon yowyr gydeyng after the greet good that ze have had in
yowyr rewle sythyn yowyr fadyr deyyd, whom God assoyle, and soo symply
spendyt as yt hath ben. God geve yow grace to be of sadde and good
dysposyn here after to Hys plesans, and comforte to me, and to all yowyr
frendys, and to yowyr wurchyp and profyte here after.

And as for yowyr brothyr Wylliam, I wuld ye xulde purvey for hys
fyndyng, for as I told yow the laste tyme that ye ware at home, I wuld
no lenger fynde hym at my cost and charge; hys boord and hys scole hyer
ys owyng sythyn Seynt Thomas Day afore Cristmesse, and he hathe greet
nede of gownys and odyr gere that whare necessary for hym to have in
haste. I wulde ze xulde remembyrt and purvey them, for as for me, I wul
nat. I thynke ze sette butte lytyl be myn blessyng, and yf ye dede, ye
wulde a desyyrd yt in yowyr wrytyng to me. God make yow a good man to
Hys plesans.

Wretyn at Mawteby, the day after Seynt Lauerons, the yere and the renge
of Kyng E. the iiij^te the xvij. zere.

  Be yowyr Modyr.

    [Footnote 294-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter is not
    addressed, the original being a corrected draft, but there is no
    doubt it was written to Sir John Paston in reply to the last. It
    is endorsed in a more modern hand: ‘Copia literæ Jo. Paston, mil.,
    a matre sua.’]


918

EDMUND BEDYNGFELD TO SIR JOHN PASTON[296-1]

_Un to the ryght wurschepful Sir John Paston, Knyght._

[Sidenote: 1477 / AUG. 17]

Master Paston, after all dew recomandacion, and herty dissire to here of
your good hele, plese yt you to wete I have spoken with Sir John of
Medilton as wel as I cowde, and yt had ben for myself, for his hoby that
ye dissired, and tolde hym he myght wel forbere hym nowe in as moche as
Mastres Jane was ded, and that yt is a great cost for hym to kepe moo
hors than he nedyth; and he answered me, that he wold selle hym with
good will, but ther shuld no man bie hym under x_li._ Flemesch;[296-2]
and I offered hym in your name, x. marke, for he wold not here of none
other ambelyng horse, that ye myght geve hym therfore. And also my lord
dissired to have bowte hym for the Lord Schauntrell that is cheff
capteyn of Seynt Omers; and he wold no lesse lete my lord have hym than
x_li._ and so my lord bowte another, and gave hym the seide lord, for he
thoughte this to dere; neverthelesse he wol not selle hym to no man
under that mony, that he sette hym on, and so ye may bye your plesur in
hym and ye lest; for otherwyse he wol not doo for you, as I conseve.

And as for tydyngs in theyse partyes, the Frenche Keng leyzth at sege at
Seynt Omers, on the one side of the town a myle of, but he hath no gret
ordenaunce ther; and they of the town skyrmysh with them every day, and
kepe a passage halff a myle with oute the town; and the French Keng hath
brenned all the townys, and fayre abbeys, that were that way aboute
Seynt Omers, and also the cornes weche ar there. And also, as yt ys
seide for serteyn, the French Keng hath brenned Cassell, that ys myn
hoold Lady of Burgeynys[297-1] joynttor, and all the countre there
aboute, whereby she hath lost a gret part of her lyvelod; and that is a
sherewed tokyn that he menyth wel to the Keng, howur suffereygn Lord,
when he intendyth to distroye her.

Morover Sir Phylep de Crevekere hath takyn them that were in Fynys with
inne this iiij. dayes to the noumbre of xiiij. personys, and the
remnaunt where fled, and he had them to the French Keng, and he hath
brentte all the place, and pulled down the towre, and a part of the
wall, and disstroyed yt.

And as yt is seid, yf the French Keng can not gete Seynt Omers, that he
intendyth to brenge his armye thorwe theyse marchys into Flaundres;
wherefore my lord hath do brokyn all the passages excep Newham bryge,
weche is wached, and the turne pyke shette every nyght. And the seide
French Keng with inne these iij. dayes rayled gretely of my lord to
Tygyr Pursevaunt, opynly byfore ij. hundred of his folks; wherefore yt
ys thaught here that he wold feynde a quarell to sett upon thys town, yf
he myght gete avantage. And as I understonde, the Emperorys sone[297-2]
ys maryed at Gaunte as this day; and ther cam with hym but iiij. hundred
horse, and I can here of no moo that be comyng in serteyn; and in mony
he brengyth with hym an hundred thowsand dokets, wheche is but a smalle
thyng in regard for that he hath to doo. Wherefore, I fere me sore, that
Flaundres will be lost; and yf Seynt Omers be whonnyn, all is gon, in my
conceyt. Never the lesse they say there shuld come gret powere after the
Emperorys son; but I be leve yt not, by cause they have ben so long of
comyng.

And I pray you to recomaunde me unto Sir Tyrry Robsert, and that yt
plese you to lete hym knowe of your tydyngs, and Hour Lord have you in
His kepyng.

At Calais, the Sunday next after Hour Lady the Assumpsion.

  Your,

  E. BEDYNGFELD.[298-1]

    [Footnote 296-1: [From Fenn, ii. 250.] The events referred to in
    this letter prove that it was written in the year 1477.]

    [Footnote 296-2: Between £5 and £6 English, and equal in value to
    upwards of £20 at this present time, apparently a great price for
    a hobby.--F.]

    [Footnote 297-1: Margaret, sister to Edward IV., widow of Charles
    the Bold, Duke of Burgundy.]

    [Footnote 297-2: Maximilian, son of the Emperor Frederick, married
    Mary, daughter and heir of Charles the Bold, Duke of
    Burgundy.--F.]

    [Footnote 298-1: Edmund Bedyngfeld married Margaret, daughter of
    Sir John Scot, Comptroller of Calais, and was created a Knight of
    the Bath at the Coronation of Richard III. He was highly in favour
    with Henry VII., who paid him a royal visit at Oxburgh, in
    Norfolk, which fine seat he built. He died in 1496.--F.]


  [Transcriber’s note:
  In the following section, lines shown as ---- were blank in the
  original.]

919

AGNES AND WILLIAM PASTON[298-2]

[Sidenote: 1477 / AUG. 22]

_The names of the maners of Agnes Pastons and William Paston, in
Norfolk, how thai shuld be taken hede to this harvest, anno xvij^{o}._

_And a copy of the same send to Richard Lynstede, the xxij. day of
August, anno xvij^o, per Bacheler Water._

  Paston maner,
    Se that the fermour in his corne on my moders fe.
    Seale dores and distrayne, and put in a newe fermour.

  Wodemyl,
    Distrayne.

  Latymers,
    Gadir the rente.

  Sewardbys,
    Gadir the rente.

  Trunche,
    Distrayne on the grounde after it is fellid, while it lieth
    on my moders fe.

  Spriggeis,
    Gader the rente.

  Knapton fe,
    ----

  Crowmer,
    Gadir the rente.

  Owstoonde,
    Distrayne.

  Rowton,
    Distrayne, and arest the fermour.

  Riston,
    Lete Lynstedes brother gader the rente.

  Oxned maner,
    Se the fermour in his croppe, and after seale doris and distrayne,
    and lete hym not renne in dette as other fermours did.

  Oxned mylle,
    Se the fermour in his croppe, and after seall doris and distrayne,
    and lete hym not renne in dette as other fermours did.

  Caster Cleres,
    Aske the ferme.

  Holkhams tenement,
    Aske the ferme.

  The mersh in Caster,
    Aske the ferme.

  Caster Bardolf,
    Aske the ferme a rent.

  Caster Clere rentes,
    Distrayne tenauntes.

  Holham rentes,
    ----

  Ormysby my fe,
    ----

  Somerton,
    Se that he in his corn, and seall dores and distrayne,
    til he fynde suerty.

  Thirn,
    Aske the ferme.

  Sowth Walsham,
    ----

  Halvyrzates,
    ----

  Todenham,
    Aske the rente, and areste Smyth.

  Cokfeldes,
    Aske the rente.

  Apawys,
    Se he in his corn, and seall dores and distrayne.

  Marlyngfor maner,
    Sele doris and distrayne.

  Marlyngford mylle,
    Seale doris and distrayne.

  Merlyngforde tenauntes,
    Distrayne.

  Melton,
    Se the croppe inned, and seale doris and distrayne.

  Bonwell,
    Aske rente.

  Carleton,
    Aske rente.

  Thuxstons,
    Aske rente.

  Lynghall nuper Dokkynges,
    Aske rente fro Mich. xvj. till xvij^o and distrayne.

  Bulmans nuper Dokkynges,
    Aske rente fro Mich. xvj^o til xvij^o, and exorte Martyn to kepe
    the ferme still, and if he woll not, praye hym to gete a noder.

  Yeaxham nuper Dokkynges,
    Aske rente fro Mich. xvj^o till xvij^o, and gete a newe fermour,
    and increse the rente, and make a newe terrar and rentall.

  Styberd nuper Dokkynges,
    Aske rent fro Mich. xv^o till Mich. xvij^o, and distrayne,
    and allowe no dewty of Dokkynges in abatyng my rente.

  Thymbilthorp nuper Dokkynges.
    Aske rente fro Mich. xv^o till Mich. xvij^o, and distrayne,
    and allowe noe dewty of Dokkynges in abatyng my rente.

These maners that are trahid take gode hede that ye be in gode suertye
of them this harvest tyme.

    [Footnote 298-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] The heading of this
    document is taken from an endorsement on the original MS.]


920

SIR JOHN PASTON’S WILL[300-1]

[Sidenote: 1477 / OCT. 31]

[I, JOHN PASTON,] Knyght, in the last day of O[ctober, Anno] Domini
m^{l}cccclxxvj^o, will, graunte, and be queth my sowle to All myghty
God, and to the . . . . . . Marye, Seint John Baptist, Seint Gorge,
Seint Cristofur, and Seint Barbara; and my body, yf I dyghe ny the Cyte
of London, [to the chapel] of Owre Lady in the Whithe Frerys there, at
the Northeest corner of the body of the chyrche, and there to be made an
orator[y] . . . . . or muche leke as ys over Sir Thomas Browne in the
Frere Prechours, to the valour of xx_li._, so that it may cause . . .
. . . ther prayours there, the rather to remembre my sowle, and to pray
therefore; and that there be gevyn to the behoff . . . . . at plotte of
grounde be made suer unto me for ever the some of xx. marc.

. . . . . . . dayly, be the space of an holl yere, by soumme well
disposed brother of the same howse, and that the seyd brother . . .
. . . [not]withstondyng yf I decesse in the counte of Norffolk, or there
nye abouute, I wolde my bodye were buried at the prio[ry of Bromholm]
. . . . . un to the Founders Toumbe, which arche is unto the North syde,
and ryght agayn my fadyr toum[be] . . . . . . . . . ith an awter and a
toumbe for me, to the value of xx_li._, and that the howse there have a
rewarde . . . . . . . . . to the frerys of London, and that there be
also a broder of that howse to synge for my sowle by one . . . . . . .
. . . salarye.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . a closette made at my cost over my
faders body ther . . . . . . . . . . of xx_li._, so that owre cousyns
. . . . . . . . . . have the more devocion to that place, and the rather
reste there bodyes there the encresse of the . . . . . . . . . . encrese
and profite of the howse, and reste on the religeus there of, lyke as
owr auncetours have . . . . . . . . . [a]nd to the entent that I
disclosed but on to fewe persons concernyng the fee ferme that is payed
. . . . . . . . Duke of Suffolk.

[Item, I will that my bro]ther, John, yf I dye with owth yssue leffull
of my bodye, have the maner of Swaywell to hym and . . . . . . . .
accordyng to the willez both of myn graunfader and of my fader, on whos
sowles God have mercye, the . . . . . . . . esse.

[Item, I will that the] Bysshoppe of Wynchester, or his assygnes, woll
and fynde suerte to do founde at the lyste iiij. prestys . . . . . . .
. . . of John Fastolf and his frendys, &c., at Caster, and that there be
bylded loggyng conveniant for those . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
adjoynyng uppon the bakhous over the gardeyn withouuth the mote on the
Weste syde of my . . . . . . . . . . . in the seid maner or maners yn
Caster, graunt by chartour, grounde, space, and londe, convenyant for
such . . . . . . . . entre and yssue therunto, and to that entent, and
byldyng or purchasyng of license of the kyng . . . . . . . . profitez of
the seid maners holly be expendid the terme of vij. yerez next after my
dissece; and, moreover, . . . . . . . . . resorte theder in his owne
persone to over see the werkys or byldyng or establyssyng of the seyd
howse [he shall h]ave playn lyberte to dwell withinne my seid maner and
fortresse the seid terme of vij. yerez, and that . . . . . . . . estys.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . [cha]pell of Seint John Baptyst, withyn the
seyd towne of Caster, with all the profitez yerly of that same
begeny[ng] . . . . . . . . . ed to the seyd college or howse for
evermore, with lycence therunto had of the Kyng and of the Pope, with
. . . . . . . . in Caster before seyd, which londis, with the seyd
chapell, schalbe of the yerly value of vij_li._ yerly . . . . . ment of
one prest above the charge that the Bysshope wyll do to pray for the
sowles of my fader . . . . . . . . . Thomas Lyndys, clerk, and of Sir
John Dawbeney. And that after this above wretyn be performed, yf that
. . . . . . es make astate by fyne reryd and enrolled in the Kynges
courte of the seid maner and maners in Castre . . . . . . . . . . .
yssue of his bodye laufully comyeng, and for defaute of yssue of his
body lawfully [rem]ayne to the issue of my moders lawfully commynge. And
for defaute of yssue of her body lawfully commyng . . . . . . . . myn
uncle, Edward Maudeby, and to the yssue of his body lawfully commynge.
And that for defaute . . . . . . . . . [comm]yng that the seyd maners
remayn to my cousyn, Sir William Calthorp, and to the right eyrez . . .
. . . . . . . . . . defaute of issue of his body lawfully commynge, the
seyd maners to reverte to the . . . . . . . .

[Item, I will that the priest of the chap]ell of the seyd collage be
presented by the lordys of my seid maner . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . ed by Syr John Fastolff.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . eryng de eadem villa vendatur per
executores meos ad perimplendum et persolvendum. . . . . . . . . . . . .
em invenerit securitatem ad redimendum manerium de Sporle prædictum,
quod si ipse . . . . . . . . . x. acr’ terræ de eisdem perquesit’ de
Johanne Kendall tempore debito dentur prædicto Johanni fratri [meo et
hæredibus suis legiti]me procreatis; et defectu exitus legitimi de
prædicto Johanne fratre meo, tunc prædictæ terræ et tenementa remaneant
. . . . . . . . . . . . . triavi mei, legittime procreatis; et pro
defectu exitus legittimi prædicti triavi mei, tunc remaneant Willelmo
. . . . . [et hæredibus i]psius Willelmi legitime procreatis; et pro
defectu exitus legitimi prædicti Willelmi, tunc omnia prædicta terræ et
tenementa [remaneant] . . . . . . assignatis imperpetuum; proviso quod
executores testamenti Willelmi Pekering habeant x. marcas pro . . . . .
et habeat xxxvij. acras terræ de prædictis terris sibi per voluntatem
patris ejus assignatis sive legatis si tantæ . . . . . . . . . . terræ
quæ idem Johannes vendidit sint de numero illarum acrarum sibi
limitatarum per Nicholaum patrem prædicti Johannis ac . . . . . . . . .
recompensacionem; eo quod idem Johannes forte credidit quod ipse juste
potuit vendere, quæque terræ et tenementa in feofamento . . . . .
[pat]ris, non obstante quod pater prædictus non declaravit quicquid
faciendum de dictis terris suis ultra certas acras . . . . . . . . . na
ipsius patris.

    [Footnote 300-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] The original of this
    document is mutilated. It is endorsed in a more modern hand,
    ‘Testamentum Johannis Paston Senioris militis.’]

  [[Sidenote: 1477
  _printed as shown, but body text says “m^{l}cccclxxvj” (1476)_

  invenerit securitatem ad redimendum
  _text reads “invenetit”_]


921

WILLIAM PEKOC TO SIR JOHN PASTON[304-1]

_To my ryth worschepffull master, Sir John Paston, Knyth, logyd at the
Goorge, be Powll Warffe, in London, in hast._

[Sidenote: 1477 / NOV. 19]

Ryth worchepful sir, I recomand me to yowr good masterchep. Plseyth you
to wete that I have purweyid for for your heryng a non after your
departyng, but I can yet no caryage, nowthir owte of Yermowth, ner in no
oder place be twyn Wynterton and Leystoft, nowthir be lond nor be the
se, not yet; and specyally for your swanes. Hery Cook seyth he wolle no
more come on the se with his good wylle. Ther is no man wyllyng to del
with your swanes. Also, as for your hors, ye most ordayne a nothir keper
than they have, or ellis ye chal not leke wel be them whan ye se hem;
they arn nowthir redyn nor corayd. Peris is meche owteward, and Whyte
wol not a tende hem, nowdyr for Peris ner for me. They arn not watryd
butt at the welle. Peris hath be ryth seke; and yet, but for dyspleser
of you, Peris had ben in hand with Whyte or this tyme. Ye muste be
proveyd of a nothir hors keper, or elles it wol do you harm on your
hors. Also, I have had iiij_li._ for to a sent you if I cowde have gete
ony trosty man to youward. As for barly, I can non selle a bove
xiiij_d._ the comb. As your leter that ye sent me, I have fownd a frere
that hath promyssyd me to do’n his dever if it may be browte a bowte be
ony mene in hast. Also there is a grete chyppe go to wrekke be for
Wynterton, and there came up on your several grownd gret plente of bowe
stawys and waynescotte, and clappalde[304-2] grete plente. I gate cartys
and caryd to the towne that that was fownd on your fee. Mastras Clere
hath sen down hyr men, and with set alle the stuff and wrekke, and seyth
that ye gete non there, for sche wol have it be the tytyl of the lete,
and I have answerd there to, that che owte non to have be that tytil;
and so if ye wol comon with yor cownsel, I trow it to the lord of the
soylle and not to the lete; for the maner holdyth nothyng of hyr. Sche
had never no wrekke nor growndage till withinne this xx. wynter. There
is no maner in Wyynterton but your; lesse your ryth now and lesse it for
ever. I am threte to be trobelid there, for there ben v. men on lyve of
the chyppe. The bordes had ben good for wyndownes and dores. Ye chuld
have had thyme worthe the money, and sche had not lettyd it. Ther is com
up ter [_tar_] at Caster v. or vj. barell. Men of Scrowby hath fet it
awey. Ye must have a meen be sum wryte of trespas for them, or ellis it
wool do yow meche harm here after. Rechard Kedman, John Pool, senior,
and William Abbys, these arn summe of ther namys of Scrowby.

Item, I receyved a leter the Twis day befor Sen Edmunde the Kyng there
as ye wryte to me for William Foster; his sewirtesse ston chargyd for
iiij_li._ vj_s._ viij_d._, as John Seyve hath seyd to me or the tyme
that I receyvyd your leter, but he hath ij. men of Norwech to sewirte to
save hym and his felaw harmeless. Scharggar is on, and Vyncent the
plomer is a nothir that chal bere the dawnger. And as for your swanes,
I have gette a man that chal cary hem be lond, and that I chal send word
with the swanes that the herynges chal com be water; and if the chuld
have ony heryng for your store, it wold be purveyd for, for heryng wol
be dere or Lente.

Item, there arn wyndownes blow opyn in the place, and the wyndown of the
gonne hows with inne the brege is revyn. I wot not whethir it was so or
ye wente or not. My Lord of Norwech was at Caster Halle for to a cen the
place as he cam to London ward. Ser, remembir your hors to have a better
keper. Ser, to remembir thesse men of Scrowby, and comon with Master
William Paston there in, for he partith with you both wrekke and
growndage in Caster; and he wold take the accyon in his lordes name that
he delyth for, it ware a good wey, be my sympil wyth. God preserve you,
and kepe yow, and bryng yow home a yen to your contre.

Wretyn at Mawteby on Sen Edmundis Evyn, the Kyng, in hast,

  Be your man and servant,

  WILLIAM PEKOC.

    [Footnote 304-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter is endorsed
    by Sir John Paston, ‘Pekok, m. [_i.e._ mense] Decembris, anno E.
    iiij^ti xvij^{o}.’]

    [Footnote 304-2: Board cut to make casks.]

  [[Plseyth you to wete that I have purweyid for for your heryng
  _all text unchanged; duplication is at mid-line in Gairdner
  but at line break in MS._]]


922

WILLIAM PEKOC TO SIR JOHN PASTON[306-1]

[Sidenote: 1477 / NOV. 30]

Ryth worchypfull ser, I recomand me to your good masterchep. Plesyth
you, as for Pekrynges mater, I sent a frere in John Pekerynges name for
the evydens; and he had an answer that if he had a busschelful of
evydenss, he chuld noon have of them, for he hath set the londe in
trobill, nor he cowd have no seyte of none. Also remembir your ryth of
your wreke at Wynterton. Thesse arn the menes namys of Wynterton, Robert
Parker of West Somerton, John Longyard of Wynterton, Thomas Goodknape of
the same, Will Wrantham and John Curteys of the same Wynterton, that
caryid of your severel grownd xxij. carte ful of stuffe, viij^xx.
bowestavis, iij^xx. and vij. waynescottes, xiiij^c. clapalde,[306-2] v.
barell ter, iiij. copil oris, and gret plante [_plenty_] of wreke of the
schyppe that is worth meche mony, as ye chal understonde the trowth
after this.

And as for your heryng that chuld in to Essexkes, they arn there, be the
grace of God. As for your swanes, they chal be there be Our Ladys Day
next comyng, I troste to God, Ho have your masterchyp in Is kepyng.

Wretyn at Mawteby, where as I am ryth werey, on Sen Andrews Day, Anno
xvij^o E.

   *   *   *

Ser, if it plese your masterchep, I sold yet no barly, ner none can a
bove xiiij_d._ the comb, as I sen word in a leter be John Russe; and I
toke iiij_li._ in mony to bryng to your materchep. The prysse of your
heryng is iiij_li._ iij_s._ iiij_d._, besyd oder costes. Hery Cook wold
goo with your swanes, for hys yefte chuld be vj_s._ viij_d._, and there
fore he wold yeffe you his labore, be so ye payd for his costes. Ipse
dixit.

  Be your servaunt,

  WILL. PEKOC.

    [Footnote 306-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] There is no address on
    this letter, but it is endorsed, like the preceding, by Sir John
    Paston, ‘Pekok, mense Decembris, anno E. iiij^ti xvij^{o}.’]

    [Footnote 306-2: _See_ page 304, Note 2.]


923

MARGERY PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[307-1]

_To my ryth reverent and worscheful husbond, Jon Paston._

[Sidenote: 1477 / DEC. 18]

Ryth reverent and worscheful husbond, I recomaunde me to yow, desyryng
hertyly to here of yowr wylfare, thankyng yow for the tokyn that ye sent
me be Edmunde Perys, preyng yow to wete that my modyr sent to my fadyr
to London for a goune cloth of mustyrddevyllers[307-2] to make of a
goune for me; and he tolde my modyr and me wanne he was comme home, that
he cargeyt yow to beyit, aftyr that he were come oute of London.

I pre yow, yf it be not bowt, that ye wyl wechesaf to byit, and sendyt
home as sone as ye may, for I have no goune to weyre this wyntyr but my
blake and my grene a lyer,[307-3] and that is so comerus that I ham wery
to weryt.

As for the gyrdyl that my fadyr be hestyt me, I spake to hym ther of a
lytyl before he zede to London last, and he seyde to me that the faute
was in yow, that ze wolde not thynk ther uppe on to do makyt [_to get it
made_]; but I sopose that ys not so; he seydyt but for a skwsacion.
I pre yow, yf ye dor takyt uppe on yow, that ye wyl weche safe to do
makyt a yens ye come home, for I hadde never more nede ther of than I
have now, for I ham waxse so fetys[308-1] that I may not be gyrte in no
barre of no gyrdyl that I have but of one. Elisabet Peverel hath leye
sek xv. or xvj. wekys of the seyetyka, but sche sent my modyr word be
Kate, that sche xuld come hedyr wanne God sent tyme, thoow sche xuld be
crod [_wheeled_] in a barwe.

Jon of Damm was here, and my modyr dyskevwyrd me to hym, and he seyed,
be hys trouth that he was not gladder of no thyng that he harde thys
towlmonyth, than he was ther of.

I may no lenger leve be my crafte, I am dysscevwyrd of alle men that se
me.

Of alle odyr thyngys that ye deseyreyd that I xuld sende yow word of,
I have sent yow word of in a letter that I dede wryte on Ouwyr Ladyis
Day[308-2] laste was. The Holy Trenyte have yow in Hese kepyng.

Wretyn at Oxnede, in ryth gret hast, on the Thrusday next be fore Seynt
Tomas Day.[308-3]

I pre yow that ye wyl were the reyng with the emage of Seynt Margrete,
that I sent yow for a rememraunse, tyl ye come home; ye have lefte me
sweche a rememraunse, that makyth me to thynke uppe on yow bothe day and
nyth wanne I wold sclepe.

  Your ys,

  M. P.

    [Footnote 307-1: [From Fenn, ii. 256.] It is curious that after
    so much negotiation for the marriage of John Paston and Margery
    Brews, we have no record in these letters when it actually took
    place; but probably it was in August 1477, the last reference to
    it as an event not yet accomplished being on the 7th of that
    month (No. 916). In January 1478, John Paston talks of taking
    his wife to her father’s house on account of her situation, and
    their first child was born in the course of the following
    summer. This letter seems to have been written in December. Fenn
    remarks that St. Thomas’s Day might mean the Translation of St.
    Thomas à Becket, 7th July 1478, and ‘Our Lady’s Day’ might be
    the Visitation of the Virgin, 2nd July preceding. But this is
    simply impossible, because the letter is dated Thursday
    _before_ St. Thomas’s Day, which would in that case be the
    very same date as the Visitation of Our Lady, viz. the 2nd July
    1478. Besides, if the first child of John Paston and Margery was
    not actually born before July, the latter was certainly much
    nearer to her confinement then than this letter would imply.
    _See_ No. 936 in vol. vi.

    A facsimile of this letter was published in the _European
    Magazine_ for March 1787, and we have carefully compared the
    text with this facsimile.]

    [Footnote 307-2: A kind of grey woollen cloth.]

    [Footnote 307-3: Fenn suggests _Grenouilliere_ or frog-colour, but
    I find no authority for such a word; and I should suppose ‘grene’
    to be a separate word, though what ‘a lyer’ is I cannot say.]

    [Footnote 308-1: This word commonly signifies neat or elegant, and
    seems to be used here ironically.]

    [Footnote 308-2: Conception of Our Lady, 8th of December.--F.]

    [Footnote 308-3: 21st December, the day of St. Thomas Apostle, or
    perhaps 29th December, the day of St. Thomas (à Becket) the
    Martyr.]

  [[_To my ryth reverent and worscheful husbond, Jon Paston._
  _text has “myryth” but words are separated in MS._

  Footnote 307-3
  what ‘a lyer’ is I cannot say
  _possibly Lier in Brabant_]]


924

ABSTRACT[309-1]

[Sidenote: 1478(?)]

Bill in Parliament confirming the statute of Marlborough [52 Hen. III.],
with additions touching wardships, reliefs, etc., to take effect after
Easter, 1480.

  [The last Parliament before 1480 met on the 16th January 1478. This
  measure was probably introduced or intended for discussion at that
  period.]

    [Footnote 309-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]


925

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[309-2]

_To my ryght worchepfull broder, Syr John Paston, Knyght._

[Sidenote: 1478 / JAN. 21]

Syr, aftyr all dutes of recomendacyon, lyeketh yow to undyrstand that I
have comond with dyvers folkys of the Dwk of Suffolk now thys Crystmas
and sythen, whyche let me in secret wyse have knowlage, lyek as I wrott
on to yow, that he must mak a shefft for money, and that in all hast.
Wherfor, syr, at the reverence of God, let it not be lachesyd, but with
effect aplyed now, whyll he is in London, and my lady hys wyff also; for
I assarteyn yow that C. mark wyll do more now in ther neede then ye
shall peraventure do with CC. marks in tyme comyng, and thys season be
not takyn. And alweys fynd the meane that my Lady of Suffolk and Syr R.
Chamberleyn may be yowr gwydes in thys mater, for as for my lord, he
nedyth not to be mevyd with it tyll it shold be as good as redy to the
sealyng.

Syr, lyeketh yow also to remember that I told yow that Mastyr
Yotton[309-3] had, as I cam last towardes London, desyred me, by a
lettre of attorney wryttyn with hys owne hand, to se th’enprowment of
syche profytes as ar growing of hys chapell in Caster that ye gave hym;
and at syche season as I told yow of it, ye sayd on to me that ye wold
asay to make a bargayn with hym, so that ye myght have a prest to syng
in Caster. Syr, me thynkes ye can not have so good a season to meve hym
with it as now thys Parlement tyme, for now I thynk he shalbe awaytyng
on the Quene; and also if ye myght compone with hym or he wyst what the
valew wer, it wer the better, and I have promysed hym to send hym woord
thys terme of the verry valew of it, and also syche mony as I cowd gader
of it. Wherfor, syr, I prey yow that by the next messenger that ye can
get to Pekok that ye wyll send hym woord to paye me for the lond in xxx.
acres, as it hathe ben answerd before tym.

And as for tydynges here, we have none, but we wold fayne here of all
your royalte at London, as of the maryage of my Lord of York,[310-1] and
other Parlement mater; and so I prey yow that I may doo when ye have
leyser.

Syr, I prey yow that Whetley may have knowlage that my broder Yelverton
hathe promysed me to take hym xl_d._; he owyth me by reason of his
fermore at Caster more then that.

And, syr, as for my huswyff, I am fayne to carry hyr to se hyr fadyr and
hyr frendes now thys wynter, for I trow she wyll be ought of facyon in
somer. And so in my progresse fro my fadyr Brews on to Mawtby, I took
Master Playter in my wey, at whoys hows I wrot thys bylle, the xxj. day
of January, anno E. iiij^ti xvij^{o}. And I beseche God to preserve yow
and yours.

  Yowr,

  J. PASTON.

  Endorsed by Sir John Paston, ‘J. P., anno xvij^{o}.’

    [Footnote 309-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]

    [Footnote 309-3: Dr. Yotton was the Queen’s chaplain.--F.]

    [Footnote 310-1: Richard, Duke of York, second son to King Edward
    IV., married Ann, daughter and heir of John Mowbray, Duke of
    Norfolk, 15th January 1477-78.--F.]

  [[... second son to King Edward IV.
  _corrected by author from “Henry IV.”_]]


926

JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[311-1]

_To my ryght worchepfull modyr, Margaret Paston._

[Sidenote: 1478 / FEB. 3]

Ryght worchepfull modyr, aftyr all dwtes of humble recomendacyon, in as
humble wyse as I can, I beseche yow of your dayly blyssyng. Pleasyt yow
to wett that at my being now at London, lyek as ye gave me in
comandment, I mevyd to Mastyr Pykenham and to Jamys Hubart for ther
being at Norwyche now thys Lent, that ye myght have ther avyses in syche
maters as ye let me have understandyng of. And as for Mastyr Pykenham,
he is now Juge of the Archys, and also he hathe an other offyce, whyche
is callyd _Auditor Causarum_, and hys besyness is so gret in bothe thes
offyces that he can not tell the season when that he shall have leyser
to come in to Norffolk. But I left not tyll I had gotyn Jamys Hubbart
and hym togedyrs, and then I told theym your intent; and then Mastyr
Pykenham told Jamys and me hys intent, and he preyed Jamys that he shold
in no wyse fayle to be with yow thys Lent. Not withstandyng it was no
grete nede to prey hym myche; for he told Doctore Pykenham that there
was no gentyl woman in Inglond of so lytyll aqueyntance as he had with
yow, that he wold be glader to be servyse on to; and myche the glader,
for he purposeth fro hensforthe duryng hys lyff to be a Norffolk man,
and to lye with in ii. myle of Loddon, whyche is but viij. or x. myle at
the most fro Mautby. And in conclusyon he hathe appoyntyd to awayte on
yow at Norwyche the weeke nexte aftyr Mydlent Sonday, all the hole weke,
if nede be, all other maters leyd apart.

Also I comend with my brodyr Sir John at London of syche maters as ye
wold have amendyd in the bylle that he sent on to yow, and he stake not
gretly at it.

Also, modyr, I herd whyle I was in London wher was a goodly yong woman
to mary, whyche was doughter to one Seff, a merser, and she shall have
CC_li._ in money to hyr maryage, and xx. mark by yer of lond aftyr the
dyssease of a steppe modyr of hyrs, whyche is upon l. yer of age; and or
I departyd ought of London, I spak with some of the maydys frendys, and
have gotyn ther good wyllys to have hyr maryd to my brodyr Edmund.
Notwithstandyng, those frendys of the maydys that I comond with avysyd
me to get the good wyll of one Sturmyn, whyche is in Mastyr Pykenhamys
danger[312-1] so myche that he is glad to please hym; and so I mevyd
thys mater to Mastyr Pykenham. And incontinent he sent for Sturmyn, and
desyred hys good wyll for my brodyr Edmund, and he grantyd hym hys good
wylle, so that he koud get the good wyll of the remenaunt that wer
executours to Seff, as well as the seyd Sturmyn was; and thusferforthe
is the mater. Wherfor, modyr, we must beseche yow to helpe us forward
with a lettyr fro yow to Mastyr Pykenham to remembyr hym for to handyll
well and dylygently thys mater now thys Lent; and for I am aqueyntyd
with your condycyons of old that ye reke not who endytyth more lettres
than ye, ther for I have drawyn a note to yowr secretarys hand, Freir
Perse, whyche lettre we must prey yow to send us by the berer herof, and
I trust it shall not be longe fro Mastyr Pykenham.

Your doughter of Sweynsthorpp and hyr sojornaunt E. Paston recomandyth
hem to yow in ther most humble wyse, lowly besechyng yow of your
blyssyng; and as for my brodyr, Edmund Sweynsthorpe, for none intrete
that hys ostas your doughtyr, nor I koud intrete hym, myght not kepe
hym, but that he wold have bene at home with you at Mautby on Sonday
last past at nyght; and as he was departyng fro hens, had we word fro
Frenshes wyf that, God yeld yow, modyr, ye had govyn hym leve to
dysporte hym her with us for a vij. or viij. dayes; and so the drevyll
lost hys thank of us, and yet abode nevyr the lesse.

Your doughtyr sendyth yow part of syche poore stuff as I sent hyr fro
London, besechyng yow to take it in gree, though it be lytyll plente
that she sendyth yow. But as for datys, I wyll sey trowthe, ye have not
so many by ij. pownd as wer ment on to yow, for she thynkys at thys
season datys ryght good mete. What so ever it menyth, I prey God send us
good tydynges, Whom I beseche to preserve yow and yours, and so send yow
your myst desyred joye.

At Sweynsthorp, on Ashe Wednysday.

  Your sone and humble servaunt,

  J. PASTON.

Modyr, pleasit yow to remember that ye had need to be at Norwyche v. or
vj. dayes befor that Jamys Hubbart and your consayll shall be ther with
yow, for to look up your evydence and all other thynges redy. Also if ye
thynk that thys bylle that I send yow herwith be good i now to send to
Doctore Pykenham, ye may close up the same, and send it sealyd to me
ayen, and I shall convey it forthe to hym.

    [Footnote 311-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter appears from
    the contents to have been written after John Paston’s marriage, at
    a time when his wife was staying at Swainsthorpe. He also
    apologises to his mother for his wife having detained two pounds
    out of a certain quantity of dates that he himself had sent to her
    from London by way of Swainsthorpe, as Margery thought them ‘at
    this season right good meat,’ apparently referring to her
    approaching confinement.]

    [Footnote 312-1: _i.e._ in his debt.]


927

WILLIAM BOTONER TO SIR JOHN PASTON[313-1]

_To the Ryght worshypfull sir, Sir John Paston ch’l’r logged at the
signe of the George next to Poulys Wharf; or to lefe thys letter at a
barbourys house ovyr the seyd George to delyver it to Sir John Paston._

[Sidenote: 1478 / MARCH 1]

Plese yor gode masterschyp to wete that I herd thys day how a man wend
that a jugement ys passed ayenst your entent yn the ende of the last
terme (hyt was not of verray certeyn tolde me, but as a dreme) yn the
kynges Chauncerye. I coude gefe none aunswer therto. I prai God alle be
well; hyt wold ease som of your frendes hertys yff they coude understand
ony gode comfort. Sir, as for Robert,[314-1] I wold pray and requyre
your maistershep that he may for his lernyng be abydyng with your cousyn
of Lincoln Inne, as yt was promysed, and to be occupyed under drede of
displesir under subjecion, wyth erly rysyng accustomed, for slouth ys
the moder and norysher of all vices. He hath cost me moch goode and
labour, and now he ys uppon hys makyng by vertues governance, or undoyng
to the contrarye, and yn especyalle to be not conversant ne neere
amongis women, as I was kept froo her [_their_] company xxx. yeres or
ony suche were of my councelle, I thank God of yt. Sir, and ye write to
me as ye lust, let no name be wythynne wryt whens yt com, and that yt be
sent by sure comer to delyver yt me, for yt ys better brent then founde.
Also your discrecion ought not loth (to take the cost and labour wolle
not be gret, nether importune) for to send a man of purpose to my lord
of [_sic_] Bysshop Waltham and to hys councell lerned, ye wete to whom,
for redy serch to be made for the bill of half lefe of paper quantite of
my hand I faythfully delyvered to Master T. Danvers for to ovyrsee, of
the fyrst appoyntment ye wote off, that ye desyre so hertly to see as of
othyr manyfolde wrytyngis belongyng to yow and to me. Yt ys seyd yne a
vers: _Gutta cavat lapidem non vi set sepe cadendo_, &c.; to a slow man
or a foryetefull or lothfull man must be importune callyng allway uppon
hym tille he hafe hys entent, for now thys vacacion to spede or nevyr
shall stand in yow no stede. I can no ferther then the walle.

Item, Sir, I comyned wyth Doctor Yotton at Camebrygge late, because
there ys no dyvyne service seyd yn the free chapelle at C.,[314-2] that
he wold hafe a grete concience yn yt, and to depart wyth an honest
preste called Sir John Brykkys that ys now duellyng wyth a ryzt lovyng
kynnesman of yowres; the seyd Doctor gevyng me to aunsuer he wold comyn
wyth yow by Pasch,[314-3] and the rather wyth your gode wylle wold
depart to such one ye owe affeccion unto. Sir, I wold, as I dar tak
uppon me to owen your affeccion to the seyd John Brickys, that he may
wyth more help of your cellary hafe the better to lyve and serfe God
there to abyde and do yow service also. I mene faythfullye, and soo I
pray yow take yt; to remembre a thyng in seson ys gretely to commend,
and of a spedy avantage. The blessed Trinite be wyth yow. Wret the fyrst
day of Marche.

  Your

  W. BOTONERE.

  To J. P. c.[315-1] at London.

Item, I had foryete to hafe remembred your maystershyp to hafe a bille
to your baylly Pecok for to delyver my fermour of Tyrkbye C. or ii C.
lawre and asshe, and than to plant yn my tenement at Thyrkbye, or foras
many ye lust; for I lost the last waraunt that ye wrote me truly, and so
I was not served.

   *   *   *

Item, yff ye wryte to me, hyt hath nede to be by a sure comer, for I had
levyr a letter be brent then lost _ne forte videant Romani_ . . . and at
reverence of Jhesu that my Robert lose no tyme, nether be idelle, for
doubt of ymaginacions and temptacions. I trust wyth your principale help
to be wyth the worshypfull gentleman that made promysse to yow, &c.

    [Footnote 313-1: [Add. MS. 34,889, f. 152.] This letter would seem
    to be of the year 1478. It will be seen by No. 925 that in the
    beginning of that year Sir John Paston wished to arrange with Dr.
    Yotton to get a priest to sing in Caister.]

    [Footnote 314-1: Is this Robert, son of Sir John’s brother Edmund,
    who is mentioned in Margaret Paston’s will? The will, dated 4th
    February 1482, will be found printed in the next volume.]

    [Footnote 314-2: Caister.]

    [Footnote 314-3: Easter.]

    [Footnote 315-1: John Paston, Chevalier.]

  [[Footnote 314-1, Gairdner’s addition:
  This suggestion is quite a mistake.--See ‘my Robert’ in the PS.,
  p. 315.]]


928

CONSTANCE REYNFORTH TO SIR JOHN PASTON[315-2]

_[To Sir] John Paston, Chevalier, be this byll delyveryd in hast._

[Sidenote: 1478 / MARCH 21]

Ryth reverent and worchepful ser, I recomend me on to yowr masterschep,
effectually desyryng to here of yowr welfare and contynual prosperite;
and if it ples yow to here of my pour estat, I was in good hele at the
makyng of this sympyll byll. Towchyng the cause of my wrytyng to yowr
masterschep is, for as moche as I poyntyd with yow to a be with yow be
the day that ye asynyd me of, the wheche, with outh yowr good
supportacyon, I con not well have myn entent, withouth it ple yow to
send oon of yowr men to me, and I psal provyd a letter in myn unkyll
name, the wheche he psall delyver to my cosyn as he were myn unkyll
masagear, and be this mene I wyll come at yowr request; for my cosyn
wold I psuld not depart with hym, with outh it were to myn unkyll
servyse; hoys and all others I refuse for yowres, yf my sympul servyse
may be to yowr plesure. And of an answer herof I beseke yow be the
brynger of my byll, and I wyll conforme me to yowr en tente, be the
grace of Good, the Wheche mot preserve yow at all oures.

Wretyn at Cobham, the xxj. day of Marche.

  By yowr woman and sevnt,

  CONSTANS REYNFORTH.

    [Footnote 315-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] The writer of this
    letter was Sir John Paston’s mistress, by whom he left a natural
    daughter. The date is ascertained by an endorsement in Sir John’s
    own hand, ‘Custaunce Raynford, anno xviij^{o}.’]


929

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[316-1]

_To John Paston, Esquier, ande to Osberne Berney, and to everyche off
them, be thys letter delyveryd._

[Sidenote: 1478 / MAY 5]

I recomaunde me to yowe, and thanke yow off yowr labor that ye hadde at
Heylesdon and Drayton in seyng the woodys there. And it is soo heer that
Ric. Ferore seyde, that he repentyd hym that evyr he dalte with any
woode theer, and iff I hadde sente hym but the leest chylde that I hadde
to have warnyd hym to leve he wolde notte have dalte therwyth; and he
ffonde noe comfforte in the Chancery, but that he is lyke to contente me
for the harmes and hurte that is doone, and moore ovyr he hathe an
instrucyon that he shall ffelle noo moore.

Item, wheer as he desyryd me to be freendly to hym, I dalte so with hym,
that I trowe he wylle reporte that I seyde and dalte moore cortesly with
hym than he demyd that I wolde doo. Yitt for alle in convenyences that
myght ffalle, I wolde be gladde to have a weell stomakyd felawe that
wolde for my sake everye daye see the seyde woodes of Heylesdon and
Drayton, and to knowe iff any weer fellyd heer afftre; and iffe there be
any fellyd syns that Whetley was theer, and I can preve it by wytnesse,
I sholde have better recompence for every tree than iiij. trees weer
worthe.

Item, it is so that he hathe answeryd to my bille, wheryn he seythe that
he never knywe byfor the subpena delyveryd hym that I hadde any clayme
or entrest in the maner off Heylesdon, but that it was peasyble my
Lordys off Suffolk. Wherffor I suppose that there be many men in
Norwyche that comonyd with hym off the byenge off that woode ere evyr he
made hys fulle bergayne, and per aventure some freendys off hys gave hym
warnyng theroff, and off myn entrest. Iff any suche credyble mane that
hadde hadde any suche langage to hym, or in hys companye, or than he
bargayned, or any man that he laboryd to be halffe marchant or byer with
hym, ar any man that refusyd to bye the seyd wood bycawse off myn
entrest in the presence of Feror, any suche credyble man maye, iff he
wyll, wytnesse ther in with me, or that dare avowe it, sholde be to me a
remedy off alle that is fellyd. I praye yow, if ye can here any suche,
that ye will in the presence off them make a bylle of remembraunce
theroff, and off ther sayng, so that they maye her afftre wytnesse in
the mater. Neverthelesse, trowthe it is that he hadde knowleche ther off
i nowe, and soo hadde every man off hys havore [_substance_] in Norwych,
I dowt nott; and as for hym, I am sure he hadde knowleche, for so moche
as he desyryd at hys bargayn to have a sywerte to be savyd harmeles
ageyn me, whyche was grawntyd hym butt nott executyd. No mor, butt I
hope with Goddys grace to have hastely goode remedy for the hole maner,
and off Drayton therto, and alle the remenaunte.

Wretyn a London, the v. daye off Maye, anno E. iiij^ti xviij^{o}.

    [Footnote 316-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]


930

SIR JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[318-1]

_To my ryght worshypfull modre, Margret Paston, be thys delyvered._

[Sidenote: 1478 / MAY 13]

Please it yow to weete, that wher as I entendyd to have ben at home thys
Mydsomer, and purposyd with yowr goode helpe to have bygonne uppon my
ffadrys tombe, so that it myght have ben endyd thys somyr; it is soo,
that ffor suche cawsys as ar nowe bygunne by twyen my Lorde off Suffolk
and me, ffor the manerys off Heylesdon, Drayton, &c., for whyche materis
I most nedys be heer thys nexte terme; therffor I deme it woll be afftr
Mydsomer, er than I can see yow.

Please it yow also to weete that I comonyd with Master Pykenham to weete
iff he wolde bye the clothe off golde, for soo moche as he desyryd ons
to have bowte it, and he offryd me ons xx. marke therffor, neverthelesse
it coste me xxiiij_li._; yit nowe, when that I spake to hym ther off, he
refusyd to bye it, and seyde that he hadde nowe so many chargys that he
maye nott. Butt it is soo that the Kynge dothe mak sertayne copys and
vestymentys off like clothe, whyche he entendyth to gyve to the Coledge
at Foodryngdre, wher my lorde hys ffadre is nowe buryed, and he byethe
at a grete pryce.

I comonyd with the vestment maker ffor to helpe me fforthe with xij.
yerds, and he hathe grauntyd me to doo, as Whetleye can telle yow;
wherffor, iff it please yow that it be bystowyd ffor to make a towmbe
ffor my ffadre at Bromholme, iff ye lyke to sende it hyddr, iffe it be
solde I undretake or Mychelmesse, that ther shalle be a tombe, and
somwhatt ellys ovyr my ffadris grave, on whoys sowle God have mersye,
that ther shall noone be lyke it in Norffolk; and as ye shalle be gladde
herafftr to see it; and God sende me leyser that I maye come home, and
iff I doo not, yit the monye shall be putte to noon other use, butt
kepyd by some that ye trust, tylle that it may be bystowyd acordyng as
is above wretyn, and ellys I gyve yow cawse nevyr to truste me whylle ye
and I lyve. When I was last with yow, ye grauntyd that the seyde clothe
of golde sholde be bywaryd [_spent_] abowte thys werke, that is above
wretyn, whyche iff ye wylle perfforme, I undretake that ther shalle be
suche a towmbe as ye shalle be pleasyd at, thowgh it cost me xx. marke
off myn owne purse besyde, iff I ons sette uppon it.

No mor, but I beseche Goode have yow in Hys kepyng.

Wretyn at London, the Wednysdaye in Whyghtsonweke, anno E. iiij^ti
xviij^{o}.

Please it yow to sende me worde by Whatley off yowr plesyr her in.

  By your Sone,

  JOHN PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 318-1: [From Fenn, ii. 260.]]


931

WALTER PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[319-1]

_To his worchypfull moder, Margaret Paston, dwellyng in Mawtby, be this
letter delyveryd in hast._

[Sidenote: 1478 / MAY 19]

Rytgh reverent and worchypfull moder, I recomaund me on to yowr good
moderchypp, besechyng yow to geve me yowr dayly benediccyon, desyeryng
hartyly to heer of yowr prosperyte, whych God preserve to Hys plesure,
and to yowr hartys desyyr, &c. I marvel soor that yow sent me noo word
of the letter wych I sent to yow by Master Wylliam Brown at Ester.
I sent yow word that tym that I xold send yow myn exspenses
partyculerly; but as at thys tym the berar her of had a letter sodenly
that he xold come home, and there fore I kowd have no leysur to send
them yow on that wys; and there fore I xall wryt to yow in thys letter
the hool som of my exspenses sythyns I was with yow tyll Ester last
paste, and also the reseytys, rekenyng the xx_s._ that I had of yow to
Oxon wardys with the Buschopys fyndyng.

The hool some of reseytys ys v_li._ xvij_s._ vj_d._, and the holl some
of exspenses ys vj_li._ v_s._ v_d._ ob. qua., and that comth over the
reseytys in my exspenses I have borowd of Master Edmund, and yt drawyth
to viij_s._ And yet I recone none exspenses sythyns Ester. But as for
them, they be non grete; and therfor I besech yow to send me mony by Syr
Richard Cotman, brynger of thys letter, or ellys by the next masenger
that yow kan have to me.

I besech yow that he that I sent by thys letter to yow may have good
scher, yf he brynge yt hym selfe, as he telth me that he woll, for he ys
a good lover of myn. Master Edmund Alyard recomaund hym specyaly to yow,
and to all my brodyrn and systyrs, and to all yowr howshold; and I
besech yow that I may be recomaundyd to all them also, and specyaly to
my brodyr John the yonger. No more to yow at thys tym, but Allmythy
Jhesus have yow in Hys kepyng. Amen.

Wretyn at Oxonforth, on Seynt Dunstonys Day and the xix. day of May.

  By your sonn and scoler,

  WALTER PASTON.

    [Footnote 319-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter is printed
    in Fenn’s fifth volume, and dated by him in 1478. I do not know on
    what evidence he assigns this particular year to it, except that,
    as he tells us elsewhere, Walter Paston took a degree at Oxford,
    and died in 1479.]

  [[Rytgh reverent and worchypfull moder
  _spelling unchanged_]]


932

J. WHETLEY TO SIR JOHN PASTON[320-1]

_To the ryght worsh[yp]full Sir John Paston, Knyght, loged at the sygne
off the George at Powlys Wharff, in London, be thys delyvered in hast._

[Sidenote: 1478 / MAY 20]

Pleas it your meastershep to understond the dealyng of every thyng, the
wych I was charged with at my departyng frome your measterchep.

Fyrst, your suppena to Denton was delyvered by me on Trenite Sondaye, in
hys parych cherch, at Matens tyme, be ffor the substans of the parych;
and as for Drayton wod, it is not all down yet, but it drawes fast
toward. I have the names of all the mynestres off and in that wod, and
more schall know or I come, yf ther be any more dealyng, &c.

And as for Haylysdon, my Lord of Suffolk was ther on Wedensday in
Whytson Weke, and ther dined, and drew a stew and toke gret plente of
fych; yet hath he left you a pyke or ij., agayn ye come, the wych wold
be gret comford to all your frendes, and dyscomford to your enmys; for
at hys beyng ther that daye ther was never no man that playd Herrod in
Corpus Crysty[321-1] play better and more agreable to hys pageaunt then
he dud. But ye schall understond that it was after none, and the weder
hot, and he so feble for sekenes that hys legges wold not bere hyme, but
ther was ij. men had gret payn to kepe hym on hys fete; and ther ye were
juged. Som sayd ‘Sley;’ some sayd ‘Put hym in preson.’ And forth com my
lord, and he wold met you with a spere, and have none other mendes for
the troble at ye have put hym to but your hart blod, and that will be
gayt with hys owen handes; for and ye have Haylesdon and Dreton, ye
schall have hys lyff with it. And so he comford your enmys with that
word that thay have dealed and dealeth with the wod, and most pryncepall
nowe is Nycolesse Ovye. For as for Ferrer,[321-2] the Meare, he delys
not with owt it be under covert; for it is sayd that he be soght my lord
that he myght have other sygnementes for hys money that he had payd, for
playnly he wold deall no mor with the wod. And so my lord hath set in
the Bayly of Cossay, and all is doon in hys name; and as for hys
servauntes, thay dayly thret my measter your brother and me to slay for
comyng of ther lordes ground, and thay say that we made an entre; and
thay beth answerd as ye comaunded me, for many a gret chalaunge make
thay to Mester John, both Measter Wodhowse, Wysman, with other dyveres
that I know not ther names; but he holdeth hys own that thay gayt no
grownd of hym. And thys he lettes thaym knowe that if thay bete hym or
any of hys, thay schall aby vj. for on, and so thay deall not but with
ther tonges; and as yet, syth Ferrer was at London, there passes not
iij. acres of wod down but thay cary fast for fere of rayn, &c.

Also, sir, I trust to bryng or send hastely the cloth off gold, for it
hath ben largely tempted; but as yet I have none playn answer, but put
in hope. Also I have spoken with Popy for your money, and delyvered hym
your letter, the wych, as he sayth, is a straunge thyng to hym, for, as
I understond, he that owght thys deute was uncle to thys yong man, and
he sayth that hys fader was never exsecutor to hym, nor never mynestred;
and I told hym howe that hys fader was bound for the same deute, in so
mech and my measter wold have forgevyn part of the same deute, he wold
have payed it; and so he will be at London thys terme, and speke with
you, and thys is hys answer.

Morover Wyllyam Worsestre, mevyd unto me of onne Sir Wylliam Bokkyng,
exsecutor and brother to John Bokkyng, the whych was one of Sir John
Fastolf hys clerkes, the whych mater I knewe not, nor had no
comaundement be you to deall therin, and so I told hym. Never the lesse
he sayd that ye promysed hym to have sent your will to have bene done in
that mater by me, and so he troweth that it was owt of your mynd at my
departyng. Yff so be that ye will any thyng to be doon by me or I come
to yow in that mater, let me have knowlege schortly, for I thynk to be
with yow in the weke folowyng aftyr thys wryten, with owt I may have
more comford of money then I have yet.

And as for my meastres, your moder hath ben gretly deseased and so seke
that she wened to have dyed, and hath made her wyll,[322-1] the wyche ye
shall understond more when I come, for ther is every man for hym selff.
I know not the sercomstance of every thyng as yet, and therfor I writ no
more to you therin, but I am promysed to know or I depart from thens.

Also I spake with William Barker, and he sayth that I shall have the
stuff or I depart, or els the monye agayn that he hade of Wylliam
Pecoke.

Also, sir, as for your lond be syd Bromholm that ye had of Bakton, it
hath layn un ocupyed syth ye were ther.

Moreover, my Lord of Suffolk[323-1] is remevyd in to Suffolk the morow
after that he had bene at Haylesdon, and my lady purposed to remeff
after on thys day, Corpus Crysty Evyn, by the grace of Jesu, Who
preserve yow ever in worchep.

Wryten at Norwych, on Wedensday Corpus Crysty Evyn, anno E. iiij^ti
xviij^{o}.

   *   *   *

Item, as for the knowleg that Ferror denyed by hys othe that he knew
never no tytle nor entrest that ye had in and to Haylsdon and Dreton, as
yet we can not know; but thys thay will record all that were at the
delyveraunce of the wryt that he sayd my lord had promysed to save hym
harmles, in so mech that Wysman was bownd to Ferrour to save hym
harmeles, and he had for bryngyng that mater about, that Ferrour shuld
have the wod, xx_s._

  Your servaunt,

  J. WHETLEY.

    [Footnote 320-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]

    [Footnote 321-1: Corpus Christi Day, the Thursday after the Octave
    of Whitsuntide, was famous for the acting of Mysteries,
    particularly at Chester.--F.]

    [Footnote 321-2: Richard Farrer, Farrour, or Ferriour, was five
    times Mayor of Norwich, namely, in 1473, 1478, 1483, 1493, and
    1498.--F.]

    [Footnote 322-1: The will now made by Margaret Paston was
    afterwards cancelled, as that which was proved after her death in
    1484 was dated on the 4th of February 1482, 21 E. IV.]

    [Footnote 323-1: John de la Pole, Duke of Suffolk, etc., married
    Elizabeth, third daughter of Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York,
    and sister of Edward IV. They both lie buried at Wingfield, in
    Suffolk.--F.]

  [[be thys delyvered in hast
  _final italic “d” misprinted as “a”_]]


933

MARGARET PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[323-2]

_To the ryght worshypfull Sir John Paston, Knyght._

[Sidenote: 1478 / MAY 27]

I greet yow well and send yow Goddys blyssyng and myn, latyng yow wete
that I have sent yow be Whetele the clothe of golde, chargyng yow that
it be not solde to none other use than to the performyng of yowyr fadyrs
toombe, as ye send me worde in wrytyng; yf ye sell yt to any othyr use,
by my trowthe, I shall never trost yow wyll I leve.

Remembyr that yt coste me xx^ti marke the pleggyng owte of yt, and yf I
wher not glad to se that made, I wolde not departe from it. Remembyr yow
what charge I have had with yow of late, whyche wyl not be for my ease
this ij. yer; whan ye may better, I trost ye whyll remembyr yt.

My cosyn Clere dothe as meche coste at Bromhom as whylle drawe an C_li._
upon the deskys in the quere, and in othyr places, and Heydon in lyke
whyse, and yf ther shulde no thyng be don for yowyr fadyr, yt wolde be
to gret a schame for us alle, and in cheffe to se hym lye as he dothe.

Also as I understond that my cosyn Robert Clere thynkyth gret on
kyndenesse in delyng wyth hym of Pecoke, for certeyn pasture that
ye[324-1] grawntyd hym to have, and Pecoke hath letyn it to othyr, suche
as he lyste to lete yt to, not withstondyng my cosyn hath leyd the
pastur with hys catell, and Pecok hathe strenyd them.

I thynk thys delyng is not as yt shulde be. I wolde that iche of yow
shulde do for other, and leve as kynnysmen and frendys; for suche
servawnts my make trobyll by twyxe yow, wheche wher a ageynste cortesy,
so nyhe newbors as ye be, he is a man of substance and worchyp, and so
wylle be takyn in thys schyr; and I wer lothe that ye shulde lese the
good wylle of suche as may do for yow.

Item, wher as ye have begonne your cleyme in Heylysdon and Drayton,
I pray God send yow good spede and foderance in yit. Ye have as good a
season as ye wulde wysche, consyderyng that yowyr adversary standys not
in best favyr with the Kynge.

Also ye have the voyse in this contre, that ye may do as meche with the
Kyng, as any knygth that ys longyng to the corte. Yf yt be so, I pray
God contynu yt; and also that ye shuld mary rygth nygth of the Qwenys
blood; qwat sche ys we are not as certeyn, but yf yt be so, that yowyr
lond schuld come agayne by the reason of yowyr maryage, and to be sett
in rest, at the reverence of God for sake yt nowt, yf ye can fynde in
yowyr harte to love hyr, so that sche be suche one as ye can thynke to
have issu by, or ellys, by my trowthe, I had rather that ye never maryd
in yowyr lyffe.

Also, yf yowyr mater take not now to good effecte, ye and all yowyr
frendys may repent them that ye began yowyr cleyme, with owte that ye
have take suche a suyr wey, as may be to yowyr intent, for many
inconvenyens that may falle ther of. God send yow good spede in all
yowyr maters.

Wretyn at Mawteby, the day after Seynt Austyn in May, the xviij. yer of
Kyng Edward the iiij^te.

  Be yowyr Modyr.

    [Footnote 323-2: [From Fenn, ii. 264.]]

    [Footnote 324-1: Fenn’s literal text reads ‘that be grawntyd,’
    which seems to be an error. In the modern transcript it is ‘that
    ye granted.’]


934

OXNEAD PARSONAGE[325-1]

_The comodytys off the parsonage and the valew off the benyfyce off
Oxned._

[Sidenote: 1478 / JULY 31]

My new parson off Oxned, whan he is instute and inducte, at the first
entre in to the chyrch and benefyce off Oxned, must off awncyent custom
long contynued with in the dyosesse off Norwyche, pay to the byschopp
off Norwych, for the first frutes off the seyd benefyce, xiiij. marke;
for wyche xiiij. marke, iff the new parson be wytty and have favour a
bowt the Byschops offycers, he schall have days off paiment to pay the
seid xiiij. marke in xiiij. yere, that is, a marke a yere, till it be
payd; so that he can fynd suffycyent mene to be bownd to the Bischopp be
obligacion to kepe his days off payment.

And the chyrch is but litill, and is resonable plesaunt, and reparyd.
[And the] dwellyng place of the parsonage is a yoynyng to the . . . .
. . . d well howsyd and reparyd, hall, chamberes, barn, doffhowse, and
all howsys off offyce.

And it hath a doffhowse worth a yere, xiiij_s._ iiij_d._

And it hath ij. large gardens with frute, and is yonynge to the place
and chyrch yard, wher off the frute is worth yerly, xxvj_s._ viij_d._

And ther longith to the seid parsonage in fre lond, arable, pasture and
medowe ayonyng to the seid parsonage, xxij^ti acre or more, wher off
every acre is worth ij_s._; to latyn [_to let_], iij_li._ iiij_d._

And William Paston, Justice, qwan he[326-1] cam fyrst to dwell in the
maner of Oxned, paid to the parson that was than for the corne growyng
on the parsonage londys and for the tythynges, ondely but in corne whan
it was inned in to the barn, xxiiij_li._

And the same yere the parson had all the awterage and oder profytes be
syde the seyd xxiiij_li._

It is yerly worth, as the world goth now, x_li._

And it is butt an esy cure to kepe, ffor ther ar natt past xx^ti persons
to be yerly howselyd.[326-2]

The parsonage stant be a fresh ryver syde.

And ther is a good markett town callyd Alysham, within ij. myle off the
parsonage.

And the cyte of Norwych is within vj. myle off the parsonage.

And the see is within x. myle off the parsonage.

And if a parson cam now, and warr presentyd, institute, and inducte, he
shuld have by the lawe all the cropp that is now growyng, that was eryd
and sowyn off the old parsons cost, growyng on the parsonage landes now,
as his own good, and all the tyth off all maner graynys off the maner,
londes, and tenantes londes,[326-3] towardes his charges off the fyrst
frutes. And if it ware innyd it war (the crop now growyng)[326-4] worth
his first frutes.

[327-1]He that hath this benefice, and he were a pore man, myght have
lycens to have service be side.

The Beshop ought not to have the valew of this cropp for the arrerages
of the fyrst fruttes that Sir Thomas Everard, last parson of Oxned, oght
to the Bysshop whan he died, for the said Sir Thomas Everard was bond to
the Bisshop in an obligacion for the said frutes, and the said Sir
Thomas Everard, for to defraude the Bysshop and oder men that he owid
mony to, gaff a way his gooddes to serten persons, qwech persons toke a
way the said goodes, and also durres and wyndow of the said parsonage;
and it is though that both the Bysshop and the patron myght take accions
a gayns the said persons.

    [Footnote 325-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] The date of this
    document is shown by the following mutilated endorsement: ‘. . . .
    . . . . . . parsonage of Oxnede made xxxj. Julii, A^o xviij^o E.
    iiij^ti.’ The first words were doubtless ‘The value of,’ or
    something to that effect; but the paper is mutilated.]

    [Footnote 326-1: ‘William Paston, Justice, qwan he.’ These words
    are a correction, interlined, in the hand of William Paston, the
    uncle of Sir John. The text stood originally, ‘And my hosbond and
    I whan we.’]

    [Footnote 326-2: _i.e._ to receive the sacrament.]

    [Footnote 326-3: _Off the maner londes and tenantes londes._ These
    words are interlined by William Paston.]

    [Footnote 326-4: This parenthesis is an interlineation by William
    Paston.]

    [Footnote 327-1: What follows is in William Paston’s hand.]


935

ABSTRACT[327-2]

[Sidenote: 1478 / AUG. 5]

Presentation by Agnes Paston of Richard Lyncoln, S.T.P., to the parish
church of Oxened, _vice_ Thomas Everard, deceased.

  London, 5 Aug. 1478.

    [Footnote 327-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]




END OF VOLUME V


  Printed by T. and A. CONSTABLE, Printers to His Majesty
  at the Edinburgh University Press

